Welcome to the Hubertman Lab guest series where I and an expert guest discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Hubertman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today's episode marks the sixth and final of the sixth episode series on fitness, exercise and performance. And today's discussion is all about nutrition and supplementation to maximize your fitness, exercise and performance goals. Dr. Andy Yalpin. I'm super excited to discuss today's topic which is nutrition and supplementation for performance and recovery. And I'm particularly excited about this conversation because I've been interested in supplementation and nutrition for performance really since my teens, but also because in recent years we've witnessed a massive transformation in the general public in terms of their view of supplementation and nutrition. First of all, more people are thinking about nutrition. What is good nutrition? What is not? A very barbed wire topic as you know, but there are some truths in there that we'll discuss. But also supplementation. You know, whereas 10, 15 years ago, I think most people would either be really into supplements. That was a small percentage of people. But the majority of people were either told or were thinking, oh, you know, vitamins, you mostly excrete them. They're just expensive urine. Nowadays, it seems that many people, including many of my colleagues and physicians all the way down to sports performance experts, are taking and making recommendations about certain supplements. And so the way that I like to think about supplements is that they aren't necessarily just supplements, which makes it sound like they are augmenting what should already be there, but you're not quite getting enough of. But indeed, a lot of these things we call supplements are very potent compounds that can transform our ability to perform in the short term, to recover from exercise. And that can really shape brain chemistry, hormone patterns acutely and when taken long term. So I'm very excited about today's topic and to be able to try and sort through this, let's call it a cloud, hopefully not a storm, but this cloud of supplements that are out there. Because indeed, many of them are excellent and can provide us a lot. Some of them are terrible. And then some just don't do anything. And therefore are terrible because either they have side effects or because they're very expensive and they don't do anything. And then of course within the realm of nutrition, there's an equal amount of confusion. But that's why I'm talking to you because you're going to put clarity and structure and definition on these incredibly important topics. You absolutely nailed it there. One of the major reasons supplements can work is because you can consume nutrients in extremely high concentrations such that you would not get in nature through food. Having said that, you really do want to focus on the basic sleep nutrition hydration. And I'm going to get into very specific detail later with some of those things. That said, there are plenty of situations and circumstances when supplementation can do exactly what you said. Also though, because you are taking them as such high concentrations, they can also be unproductive, they can be destructive or they can be counterproductive. So in case if you're taking a couple of supplements over here, it may actually be counteracting the benefits of some of the other supplements over there. So in the ideal situation, we would be able to work like snipers here. So we would be able to run full biological testing. So extensive blood work and saliva and urine and stool and have an end depth analysis of your gut microbiome and your stressed patterns and your time of day and your cortisol curve and like all the things that we do in our high performance folks. With that then, we can get extremely high precision supplementation and in quite honestly our philosophy is we only give individuals exactly what they need. So even some of the standard generally safe and effective supplements, we don't really necessarily use them if there's no specific need. We've talked about the consequences of this with things like antioxidants, but even simple stuff like stimulants and other tools that are effective for recovery, we don't use them unless we have a reason. That said, that's not the reality for a lot of people. They're not going to be able to do something like that or work somebody who can help them in that. So there are a handful of supplements that I would consider to be in my 80-20 rule, which is sort of like the 20% of supplements that are going to give you 80% of the benefit for the lowest cost. And so what I can actually use is sort of start there, even though this burns my skin and my soul a little bit, I absolutely hate this. I am the context guy. It depends. It's high precision guy, but let's be real. There are a number of supplements that are fairly effective and fairly cheap for a wide range of outcomes. So this is for general public. This is for people who want to do the three buckets, right? You want to look a certain way. So supplements that could enhance muscle growth and fat loss, non hormonal based supplements, of course. Supplements that can improve energy or physical performance. Again, from everything from squatting more to feeling better in your yoga class to having my energy throughout the day, to our third major bucket that we've been talking about throughout this entire series, which are longevity. So we can cover those first if you'd like to start there. Yes, absolutely. Let's start there. Oftentimes when we think of supplements, we immediately jump to high sport performance type of things or vigorous workouts or muscle building. Though that doesn't necessarily have to be the case. Take for example, Cree team. And I've spoken about this at length and with Darren Candau, who's done a tremendous amount of research. I was just up at his lab recently in Canada. And he has covered extensively. In fact, I think I put up a post perhaps I could draw this up where he laid out all the myriad of benefits of Cree team. This is taken in the typically three to five grams per day of dose of creating monohydrate, which has the most research behind it. Seems to be extremely low side effects in almost anyone. And the benefits, including course, things like muscle performance and strength and things like that. And if you go back to our discussion in our episode on metabolism and endurance, we talked about the fossil creating system. So you can figure out kind of what this is going to do in terms of effect that said there's excellent information and data coming out now on the benefits of bone mineral density in Cree team. There's a ton of work looking at a host of cognitive factors from memory, executive function to effects potentially on even things like depression, mood to Alzheimer's Parkinson's. All forms of neuro generative disease. In fact, it's pretty obvious the brain loves Cree team as a fuel. And so not only we sort of discussed in the episode as being the fuel for skeletal muscle contraction, but the brain needs to do that as well. The astro sites around the brain need to be able to ride energy, et cetera. So it's very clear that metabolism in the brain is reduced with things like TBI and potentially concussions. So now to be extremely clear, Cree team does not prevent any of those diseases. It does not treat any of them and the data are mixed, but it's more and more are coming some show a little bit of benefits some shown, you know, maybe none, but I'm not aware of any research in those areas that show it has any downside. For the most part, side effects are extremely minimal, if not null and then potentially some benefit, depending on the specific study. So we could put up a if you like a couple of links directly to those metanocies and folks can go through those things one by one. So I only say that to again, maybe expand our understanding or thinking about what these types of supplements can do. It's not just about growing muscle or, you know, high performance. It's everything to again, there's an association with recovery. So Cree team is fantastic for recovery from muscle, for muscle damage, helps and can potentially aid in fat loss and a whole host of things. So you can actually also even look at websites like examin.com. I have no affiliation with them whatsoever. But if you want to just type in something like Cree team on a hydrate, you can see a whole list. And you're going to see thousands of studies of the potential benefits of Cree team. So that is always number one on my list. I'm relieved to hear that Cree team sits at the top of your supplementation list because well, first of all, I started taking it when I was in college. At that time, I was taking it in this kind of loading mode where you take it in, you know, anywhere from 15 to 25 grams per day, often causing some gastric distress, often combining with fruit juice to try and shuttling into the muscles. And then so called maintenance phase of reducing to 10 or 15 grams per day. Nowadays, I just take about five grams or so, although later, I know you're going to tell me why I should probably be taking more than five grams per day, given my body weight. So I know we'll get into some of those specifics a little bit later. But in addition to experiencing direct effects on muscle size and strength, which I did, I don't know how it contributed to my cognitive function or if it does now because there's really no way to tease that out with standard at home tests like a scale. But it is very clear to me based on the literature that you described and some of which we've covered on other episodes of the podcast that the phosphocreating system is vitally important for for brain function, right? And as is every context dependent way of thinking or acting. And so anything that can favor function of the four brain, I think is good for humans in general. It suppresses anxiety allows us to interpret what's going on for us. And so I'm very relieved and gratified to hear that creatine sits at the top of the list. Also as I'm sure you'll point out again later, creatine is for the most part a relatively affordable supplement for most people. So here we're not talking about something that's really esoteric or that you have to fly to some remote location to get an infusion of. Right. Although I apologize to all you because I know the price has skyrocketed recently. Really? Yeah. Why is that? I think it's a well nobody knows, but it's quote unquote a supply and demand issue, if you will. So those prices have gone up. There's also of course been shipping problems in the world and things. So every time I talk about creatine right now, people just flame me for like, oh my God, it's so expensive. Now I'm like, I know I'm sorry, but honestly, it's only so expensive because you're used to being so cheap. So when you when you counter the fact that we're like, right. Yeah, like relative to the other stuff you're probably taking relative to any other number of purchases for the it still lands very high in my ROI list, my 80 20 because of that. It's it's it can be taken any time of the day. It doesn't have to be in magical combination. You talked about co-ingesting with carbohydrates. That can enhance how quickly you can get into the system. In fact, it's it's going to work on the exact same as mechanisms will probably potentially talk about hydration. But these things are shut all the so anytime you bring in carbohydrate that's going to be shipped into tissue as quickly as it can. Creatine then goes along for the right and then it brings water for the right. That's how you enhance hydration. That's why it's important to have carbohydrates when you're trying to hydrate. So you're just going to take it in there. That's also why you get quote unquote cell swelling, which is a good thing. Like you're it's just enhancing hydration. We actually use it a ton in our post weigh in protocols. So individuals have to cut water weight. Creatine's a great thing to throw back in there. It's going to help you rehydrate. It's also why when you take 30 grams of it, it can pull a bunch of fluid in the intestines and and there you go with your little bit of GI distress. So yeah, there's a lot of fun things you can talk about there. I just had to flag that because every time I've been talking about it recently and I say it's cheap people are killing me for it. So I apologize. I don't know how to make any cheaper, but it's still fairly fairly affordable. Yeah, I would say relatively inexpensive compared to a lot of supplements out there and when thinking about the return on investment is it's quite good. Yeah, so like actually sorry, sorry, sorry, I cut you up, but I was just also thinking there's been a number of studies on sleep deprivation as well with creating that can help. So obviously sleep deprivation will generally reduce cognitive function and creating can ameliorate some of that drop. So if you think about it in that context, I had a crummy night of sleep. Well, and if that enables you to perform a little bit better in your job than you would make up the dollar or so, whatever you paid for that day's supply of creating. So it is something I kind of on that note, it's not going to work as an acute response. So it's not something you're like I feel terrible. I'm going to throw some creatine down the hatch. I'll feel better that that's not going to work. It's going to take several weeks to have a noticeable effect. It needs to be stored in tissue. It needs to be built up before you can actually do much of anything. So it is unlike some of the other things like stimulants or caffeine that have an acute response right now. And so if you're going to take it, you probably need to consume it consistently. If you can't do that, then really there's no point in doing it. And the loading phase you mentioned distance were here is something you can do. Again, if you need to enhance the storage of it really quickly. So say, for example, we've done this in some military cases where it's like you get back to base and you've only got a week and then you got to go back out. We may actually have to do a little bit of a loading phase then. But if that's not the case, the loading phase is unnecessary. It's not really harmful other than maybe joyous stress and maybe waste. But you're going to have three or four weeks. It's going to reach full saturation plenty of time to be there in that if you're in that three to seven grams per day range. I'm glad you mentioned the slow accumulating positive effects of creatine as compared to so called acute effects because the way that I think of health promoting a performance enhancing protocols like viewing morning sunlight or endurance exercise. For that matter or creatine or sleep, for instance, is that while they can have effects in the immediate term, you might feel a little bit or in the case of a good night sleep a lot better. It's really the cumulative effect of raising your baseline level of functioning. Another way to think about is these supplements or behaviors and quality nutrition when done consistently over time. That doesn't mean 100% of the time. Probably 80% of the time lead to a buoyancy in your system that allows you to be more resilient under conditions where conditions aren't perfect. And if conditions are made perfect or close to perfect and you already have that buoyancy, that's when you really start to see the ultra high performance effects that are so much fun. But they have to be established through consistent supplementation consistent nutritional intake. So today I know we're going to distinguish between normally they're called chronic and acute effects, but that makes it sound like chronic illness. The moment people hear chronic, well they might think of other things. But in the context of health they typically think of chronic illness and we're not talking about that. What we're talking about is slow modulatory effects in the body. A lot of things in the body take time to build up, but once they've built up, they clearly can benefit us. And then other things as you mentioned, a stimulant for instance, has a very acute effect that is going to occur with peak within 30 minutes and we're off within four hours or so. So can also have some chronic effects, but typically it's a short lived effect. So we just want to frame up the language that we'll be using and I'm really excited to dive into this topic. And I think Cretin is a beautiful example of a supplement that has positive chronic mental and physical benefits down the road. I can come back and talk a little bit more about Cretin and we can cover some other information regarding best practices for getting the most out of it as well as we'll certainly dive into some of the common side effects or at least a thought of side effects. While we're here though, I also could throw in a few other of these high impact low cost generally safe things that are my 80, 20 rule if you will. So the way I actually kind of think about it is you want one from each of three categories and these categories are fuel, stimulant and fatigue blockers. So Cretin is actually in the fuel. It's not a stimulant as we talked about it, chronic effect there. So we've already knocked that one off. Another one from the fatigue blocker is going to be anything like beta alanine or sodium bicarbonate. And then from the stimulant use, of course we have anything like a beetroot juice to a caffeine or something of the equivalent. So we can come back again and talk about all those in more detail a little bit later. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is also separate for Dr. Andy Galpins teaching and research roles at Cal State Fullerton. It is however part of our desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme. We'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is momentous momentous makes supplements of the absolute highest quality. The Hubertman lab podcast is proud to be partnering with momentous for several important reasons. First of all, as I mentioned, their supplements are of extremely high quality. Second of all, their supplements are generally in single ingredient formulations. If you're going to develop a supplementation protocol, you're going to want to focus mainly on using single ingredient formulations. With single ingredient formulations, you can devise the most logical and effective and cost effective supplementation regimen for your goals. In addition, momentous supplement ship internationally. And this is of course important because we realize that many of the Hubertman lab podcast listeners reside outside the United States. If you'd like to try the various supplements mentioned on the Hubertman lab podcast, in particular supplements for hormone health, for sleep optimization, for focus, as well as a number of other things, including exercise recovery, you can go to live momentous spelled OUS so that live momentous dot com slash Hubertman. Today's episode is also brought to us by levels levels is a program that lets you see how different foods and activities affect your health by giving you real time feedback on your blood glucose using a continuous glucose monitor. Many people are aware that their blood sugar that is their blood glucose level is critical for everything from fat loss to muscle gain to healthy cognition and indeed aging of the brain and body. Most people do not know however how different foods and different activities including exercise or different temperature environments impact their blood glucose levels and yet blood glucose is exquisitely sensitive to all of those things. I first started using levels about a year ago as a way to understand how different foods exercise and timing of food relative to exercise and quality of sleep at night impact my blood glucose levels and I've learned a tremendous amount from using levels. It's taught me when best to eat, what best to eat, when best to exercise, how best to exercise and how to modulate my entire schedule from work to exercise and even my sleep. So if you're interested in learning more about levels and trying a continuous glucose monitor yourself, go to levels dot link slash Hubertman. That's levels dot link slash Hubertman. Today's episode is also brought to us by element. Element is an electrolyte drink that contains the exact ratios of the electrolyte sodium magnesium and potassium to optimize cellular functioning for mental and physical performance. Most people realize that hydration is key. We need to ingest enough fluids in order to feel our best and perform our best. But what most people do not realize is that the proper functioning of ourselves and nerve cells neurons in particular requires that sodium magnesium and potassium be present in the correct ratios. Now, of course, people with pre hypertension and hypertension need to be careful about their sodium intake. But what a lot of people don't realize is that if you drink caffeine, if you exercise and in particular if you're falling a very clean diet, that is not a lot of processed foods, which of course is a good thing. The chances are you're not getting enough sodium potassium and magnesium to optimize mental and physical performance. Element contains a science backed ratio of 1000 milligrams. That's one gram of sodium 200 milligrams of potassium and 60 milligrams of magnesium and no sugar. If you'd like to try element, you can go to drink element that's LMNT dot com slash Hubertman to get a free element sample pack with your purchase. Again, that's drink element LMNT dot com slash Hubertman to claim a free sample pack. I want to start off. I want to ask you about something that as soon as I say it, some people might roll their eyes or wonder why are we even talking about that now. But that I have to believe is among the more fundamental, if not foundational aspects of nutrition and supplementation for performance. And that's hydration. I mean, I think we hear hydration. It's like, okay, we have to drink six to eight glasses of water every day. Our urine should be relatively clear. If it's too dark yellow, we're not doing a good job of hydrating enough. How much of that is true? Is alkaline water worthwhile for changing the alkalinity of my body? I learned when I was in college and graduate school that the alkalinity of the different tissues in your body is very well controlled in order to keep you alive. And that you don't want it to shift too much or you can enter pretty horrible states of seizure, vomiting, and even death. So tell me about hydration and woven into that if you would educate me on electrolytes and hydration. Because I think most often when people ingest electrolytes, sure they could be ingesting salt tablets, probably getting some electrolytes. By the way, electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, potassium, through their food. I think most people think about drinking electrolytes. So water and electrolytes, I think is a vitally important topic to kick this off with. Sure. We can jump right into your alkaline water. Well, there is perhaps much to say about this. We can maybe revisit this in another seven part series all on its own. I would just say it this way. There's probably a few things you should do before worrying about the alkalinity of your water. And I'll just leave it at that. Meaning the alkalinity of the water is sort of irrelevant. Not that you won't go that far is just it's probably remember we started started off talking about 80 20. Well, this would be in my like 99 1 in terms of like if we're really at the level of worrying about the pH of their your drinking fluid, we have optimized so many other things that then we can talk about it. But until we have nailed months and years of work on other things, this is not going to make much of an impact. Great. Then perhaps you could tell us about what volume of water we should be drinking when we should be drinking that water relative to training and just generally. And anything else related to water and electrolytes that can improve mental performance physical performance and offset any ill effects. I like the fact that you mentioned physical and mental performance because it's clear in both cases. We hear that we need to drink more water and I can give you some numbers and I will in a second. What we also need to recognize is there's this is hormesis we talked about hormesis a few episodes ago and this is the case right whether we talked about food or hydration or I think I gave you the example of cyanide. Naturally occurring in your food hot water is the same way. So if you are under hydrated or dehydrated. There is a clear negative effect on your body and as I increase the level or improve the level of hydration things get better whether this is your physical performance or this is mental performance. In fact, we know that a body weight reduction of as low as 2% be a dehydration. So imagine you're doing about a exercise and you're sweating and you lose 2% of your body weight. That alone is enough to reduce accuracy in performance. So the classic study we talk about here was in basketball players. So shooting accuracy so free throw shooting I think is specifically what they looked at significant reduction in performance with as little as 2% dehydration that that level you also see a significant increase in perception of difficulty of exercise. And so only right at 2% I say 2% I mean percent body weight lost right that's what that means you start getting the three four or 5% dehydration you start having a significant reduction in blood volume. And that's incredibly important for endurance. Your blood becomes viscous it gets hard to pump through and you're going to start having all kinds of issues. So being dehydrated is again not only going to reduce performance but because of the mental aspect which we just walk through and neuromuscular issue you're going to lose accuracy you're going to lose total endurance performance and you're going to lose speed and power. So we have the triad there no matter what you're interested in it's going to be harmed by being dehydrated that also is happening then if you're starting your program dehydrated. So if you're already 1% or so dehydrated maybe you're like a little under hydrated in the use a little bit of sweat you've already hit that 2% and so we're starting to see reductions in performance there. The same happens on the other side of that or medic curve. So if you are optimally hydrated in some large window but you start going past that we can start running into equal problems remember there is a there is a need for an optimal concentration of sodium and potassium and chloride between your cell inside your cell outside your cell. These are electrolytes this is what we call osmolality and osmolarity is is really good to think of it like concentration and osmosis if you remember those terms. So if we are trying to create a muscle contraction that requires an electrical gradient and so sodium and potassium specifically magnesium calcium or positively charged and chloride is negatively charged and we need to have a certain amount inside the cell and outside the cell so that the positives and the negatives are balanced appropriately. So when we move one we change the voltage and we have in the case of a muscle contraction. I just give them through a whole lot of physiology there to say if you then go mess with fluid only and you say if I were to give you a bolus of three liters of pure water right now you're going to dilute your blood and so there's not going to be as many chemical there won't be as many electrical signals in there because you've taken the same amount of sodium and potassium and so on and put it in a larger volume of pure water. So that gradient is now changed that becomes a significant problem for contraction. I mean quite literally it can kill you this is what we call hyponotremia so no Tremia spelled N A hypo being low. Hyponotremia if you actually go to the periodic chart N A is what we use for sodium. So hyponotremia is because the word is in a Tremia actually so that what that literally means is low sodium and you didn't get that from sweating out on your sodium you actually get hyponotremia from drinking into much water. So it's not that the total amount of sodium gets low it's the fact that the concentration gets low from excessive fluid intake. So in the extremes in fact if you look at the literature you'll see anywhere between like two to 15% of people who finish endurance races are in the hyponotremia. And that varies wildly if you're doing Iron Man and Kona versus like you know the marathon and Denver and in October right it's going to be totally different depending on other conditions but these are all important. So while like death happens that is sort of extreme if you back up just a little bit you start seeing the same types of performance equipment in fact the symptoms can be identical brain fog confusion performance irritation a GI distress and you think man these are symptoms of dehydration so then you drink more water and you're just exacerbating the problem and I can actually give you one little example of this. We had an executive actually female CEO I'll say she's probably when her was in her early 40s and so she came to us and she thought man for sure she has some sort of gut problem going on because we hear a lot about kind of like gut health and how it affects everything so she's just like brain fog and I've done all these things and I got blood work done and everything's fine like nothing's going on I think I must have some sort of good thing air going on whatever is okay and we just started going through her stuff and she was I think about 170 pounds. And she was consuming like 250 to 60 ounces of water a day. That's a ton of water and we were like holy shit what are you doing this for and she says like I that's sort of like my thing is but she didn't realize it was more like a nervous tick than it was anything else right she just like sips of sips of water. I'm like man how often do you go pee she's like yeah like every you know 30 minutes or something and like fantastic sleep problems focus and so she smashing caffeine she was at like eight cups of coffee a day. Which is also going to add to excretion of sodium totally right so it's like okay we don't really need to come in and run a sleep study on you. We're just going to lower your water and she was like what we dropped her down to like 180 so basically an ounce per pound of body weight which is still high because she did train 180 ounces correct yeah. She does workout so she needed to replenish some stuff and we'll cover these numbers in a second. Instantaneous I mean like two days in she's like oh my god I haven't slept six straight hours in years and then after that it was like basically tears coming back to us right my focus my brain fog is gone because she's in a very high pressure job. It's like everything's coming back like now she was down to three or so cups of coffee a day like the whole thing digestion improved all of it she was sit like to her only problem after all the analyses was she was just shrinking way way too much water and adding more salt to her would not have solved the problem because she would have just had simply way too much fluid in her system she was having all kinds of ADHD problems and I'll do our own like the whole thing that that rolls in a cortisol the whole like system gets goes into chaos so it is important that you pay attention hydration even though as you sort of mentioned people tend to just kind of like roll their eyes around it because if you're in the middle it's fine but if you're anywhere past not even the extreme extremes but just that first standard deviation away you're going to have problems and you might be thinking a drain of fatigue you might be thinking you just like you're going to think all these things and you simply just haven't actually dialed in your hydration yeah I think people sometimes roll their eyes at the discussion of hydration because it just doesn't sound very sexy it's not like doesn't sound like a neurotransmitter or hormone it sounds like testosterone or estrogen or DHA or dopamine but it actually is all of those things yeah it sits at a level beneath all of those but not beneath on a hierarchy beneath in in terms of a foundation it's actually the without proper electrolyte balance and hydration none of the cells of the body can function and then I think people also hear that oh you know we are 70% water and somehow like that statistic alone or that fact alone doesn't seem to stimulate any kind of action will take away right I great you know like gravity also you know keeps us you know from jumping as I as we like you know what do I do and so I think it's important that people understand that every cellular process in the body critically relies on having enough sodium magnesium potassium around and the the way that it's concentrated in fluid water is really the way that you allow every cell in their body to function as well as it possibly could and respond to all the sorts of kind of quote unquote high performance tools yeah they were talking about the other thing I've observed many times over is that if people are ingesting too much water and also drinking a lot of caffeine and their electrolytes are low they get shaky and they actually you know anxiety like symptoms she when people come into my lab to do studies on anxiety and fear we ask a few questions and those questions include how much water they've had that day also a sort of bizarre fact but one that I think is worth mentioning is that when the bladder is full it stimulates a sort of anxiety if you ever had to urinate very badly and you're in the car or you can't urinate and then you get to the door like that's talk about anxiety and that's because there's a direct neural pathway from the bladder that registers the mechanosensors how much stretch there is on the bladder that sends a signal to the brain stem alertness areas broadly speaking locustrulius and others that wake us up these are the when we're awake it makes us more awake and when we're asleep this is what wakes us up to urinate in the middle of the night yeah that's actually why you can use night urination as a pretty good diagnostic of sleep disorders so if because of azo press and right on the exactly what you're talking about if you're having sleep disorder issues and you're staying awake and a vasopressin gets taken off right an APN goes straight to the kidneys your kidneys are supposed to be dormant basically at night you're not supposed to be filtering a lot of and producing a lot of urine at night if that's happening and say you you have any number of APN is kicking on or anything going on azo press and keeps going keeps sending a signal kidney start filtering so if you're waking up and being multiple times a night that's called nocturia that is a very very good sign that either one of two things happen you one you have some sort of sleep disorder or two you're drinking outrageous amounts of water and so that's actually a bit of a backward cycle that right because you're drinking way too much water you waking up and being all night that's actually ruining your sleep and so we have seen this a number of times with our sleep company as we go in and it's just like you don't need any this crap you just need to be properly hydrated alternatively if your hydration is sound and you're still waking up more than one time a night to pee on average then you almost I shouldn't say like that but there's a potential that you actually have some sort of sleep disorder sleep condition going in so the rule of thumb on that this over here once or night once a night or so of your nation is fine if it is routinely or consistently more than two you need to make some adjustments start with hydration it's the simplest way right getting a full sleep study done just figure out hydration we've had this happen a number of times where people want to get more health conscious and they just get they hear things like this and they're like I got to get in my water and then they just start train wrecking their sleep and they're waking it up so if you're waking up multiple times and you're urinating and it is a large amount of urine for you and it is clear that's probably not sleep apnea and it is not a good thing to do is not to do that's probably excessive hydration if you're waking up a bunch of times and it's fairly small amounts of urine then it's probably not the fluid issue it's probably the fact that the base of press is kicking your kidneys into gear so that's not a perfect criteria but it is just like a quick little tool you can sort of use that's actually one of the reasons why we measure almost always your body weight at night as well as in the morning so that that's the like the combat sport in the UFC fighters boxers we call that your float so much you floated overnight I like to know that number because I want to know as well your first morning void so when you wake up and you went to bed at 200 pounds you woke up the next morning at 195 oh you floated five pounds did you pee last night yeah yeah three times interesting in other case you woke up you went to bed at 200 pounds you wake up at 199.5 okay you're dehydrated because you should have a certain amount of fluid that you're just respiring out as you're breathing throughout your nose to night ideally guaranteed you're gonna wake up what was your urine like oh yeah a little bit pretty dark like shocker you're dehydrated so you can kind of look at numbers like that a general float is something like a pound to two pounds for the 170 plus pound person as you scale up that number can go up a little bit but you can kind of use these to dodge your little bit about what's going on with this kind of combination everything is everything right so it's like it's not just that one system so you're going to pay attention you can also look I don't we've been jumping into it we can but there's a whole bunch of ways I can teach you to diagnose hydration and then maybe we can start there and then we can talk about hydration numbers yes I'd love to talk about diagnostics for hydration over hydration dehydration to start off would you be willing to give us some numbers how much water should we be drinking the classic rule here and you're making me do what I hate right I want to give all the caveats first one go straight to your number half an ounce per pound of body weight is a rough rule so a few way again 200 pounds that would mean you're drink a hundred ounces of water a day most water bottles are like 12 to 20 ounces something like that so you know you're end up drinking six of those are so a day kind of like plus or minus which is not that unreasonable this does depend on a number of factors which I could go over but that is a rough starting place the only other thing to add to that is that does not account for exercise induced water loss or sauna or anything like that so that's assuming just like basil daily needs if you are exercising or sweating at all for any reasons or work related so folks at work outside or in the heat or a humid environment this these numbers all change and you can slide the scale up but you generally want to drink about 125% of the fluids you've lost during that physical activity back and how much do you lose per hour of exercise that number ranges between one to five pounds depending on the person it can even be higher with some of our athletes like I can think of a number of NFL players right now it's not in common for those guys who do eight or nine pounds even not even like crazy circumstances if it's August and Warren Jacksonville it's not wild for us those guys to go nine ten pounds what about the typical person who goes to a air condition gym or goes out for a run on a day that is somewhere between let's say 55 degrees Fahrenheit and 85 degrees for your probably looking at like a pound it's not extremely high if you are totally soaked might be like a pound and a half to two pounds if you like a comeback and like your pits are little sweaty and there's a little bit of water kind of on your neckline or it's probably like a more like a pound or so so in that case you might drink back a pound and a half of water okay so just to review these numbers to make sure that I'm on the correct page here a half an ounce of fluid per pound of body weight is a sort of a foundation for hydration and then you want to replace a hundred and twenty five percent of the fluid lost during exercise and exercise varies where exercise is done varies whether or not people are wearing uniforms or helmets is going to impact how much fluid they lose etc. in a very hot environment that the amount of fluid lost can be anywhere from you know one to five maybe even ten pounds per hour of hard hard exertion for most exercise done in conditions of 55 degrees Fahrenheit to seven to excuse me 85 degrees Fahrenheit done with some degree of effort one might lose a pound or two pounds of water super easy way to find out all you have to do is weigh yourself naked go to your workout come back in dry off where yourself naked that'll tell you exactly what you lost so if you win in you were 160 pounds you come back out you wait you 158 you lost two pounds drink back two and a half pounds of water you're good so that is a it honestly is like fairly gold standard for identifying you can actually buy a whole bunch of technology for this and they are using the exact same equation which is your body weight when you were there now if you do that though you do need to account for any fluid you drink during the workout because that then offsets it simple but I think important question we're talking about a half announce of fluid per pound of body weight does that include things like coffee tea so to pre workout drinks mid workout drinks a Monte matcha whatever the you know there's a year of a Monte there's a there are a million things out there or just water any fluid for the most part is going to count and is it true that fluids that contain caffeine generally cause us to secrete sodium? yeah okay so do you recommend including electrolyte powder or a small pinch of sodium or any number of other supplement type electrolytes that can replace that sodium magnesium and potassium? a couple of things we have to pay attention to to accurately answer that question well you also sort of asked about you may have not realized is this caffeine actually enhance dehydration which is not really what you ask but it's probably a lot of people thought that as well so caffeine can but coffee doesn't necessarily do that because remember you're co-ingesting that with fluid and so we used to say that all the time I'll coffee dehydrate to it doesn't it might make your urine yellow it certainly gives off an odor in your urine but in general coffee will not do that because your intestines if you were to now be taking caffeine pills alone now there is a bit of a diuretic effect there and so you're going to urinate how much maybe not enough for you to be really concerned with especially when you balance that against the erogogenic effects and benefits of caffeine it's not something we are concerned about second part of your question do you need to then offset the loss of sodium? I'm not super concerned about the amount of sodium lost to caffeine I am more concerned about simply the amount of sodium being correct because of the bigger circumstances like how much is actually in your system and how much you lost in the training sessions so it's not the caffeine that I care about that much relative to you know if you lost three grams of sodium because of the training and you added another few milligrams because of caffeine I don't really care or didn't I'm glad you brought up the difference between a substance like caffeine and the vehicle it's contained in like coffee this is all really important and it also raises a question about individual differences in sweating ability and I call it sweating ability because I have a good friend I've known for ages really actually work with him in my laboratory as well and he's one of these people that the moment he starts any physical activity it's like a flood warning right he just soaks through clothing is just that the sweating adaptation is is exceedingly robust in him other people less so so is it true that sweating in our ability to dump heat through it by loss of water is something that we tend to vary on and then also that we can build up that capacity I know a number of people are probably thinking it will gross why would I want to sweat more but there's actually a huge advantage to be able to dump body heat during exertion because body heat in some ways sets the cap for performance in many many ways including mental performance or ability to stay alert often is enhanced by being cold and of course we all want to warm up properly but in terms of loss of fluid through sweating is there a way to easily bend ourselves into kind of a low sweater medium sweater heavy sweater that sounds like an article of clothing but in any case you know what I'm you know man another a lot to say here which we had a whole series on this listen if we have to go 17 hours we can do it just everybody hydrate well I think we've shown the listeners that is a real threat that's a very real threat podcasting to failure you don't have to do every set in the gym to failure but here we are attempting to podcast failure in it in all seriousness what what is the role of sweating ability and is this something that any of us should care about or train for or pay attention to or is this just kind of getting into the arcane number one you can train your ability to sweat this is important for heat acclimation and why that matters when you sweat that actually is not what regulates your temperature you what you want to happen is the fluid to hit your skin and that to be evaporated that's the actual mechanism so in fact if you stop sweating like you can guarantee within a short amount of time you're going to be done moving very interesting I hope people heard that and really are highlighting that in their mind that sweating as a process of bringing fluid from your body onto the surface of your skin and then the heat dumping aspect of sweating is the evaporation of that off of your body which brings to mind all sorts of ideas about how to dress during exercise etc. But what you said is that if you are not sweating enough you are limiting your output capacity so it's not just about having enough fluid to sweat it's also about being able to sweat and being dressed appropriately to allow that sweat to move to evaporate off your body yep and heat acclimation training is as simple as the sounds so just practice it more so if you're going into a process where you either need to be in a hot environment or you need to improve your sweat right you just need to practice sweating and your body will get better so that practice the sauna practice of jacuzzi just get in those things and you will improve your ability to do that now there is a huge genetic component I have one individual actually a UFC fighter I've been working with and I don't mind mentioning his name he'll give me full permission Scott Holtsman many many years he's actually fighting right now actually today he'll be going he is like he is like you described like buckets and buckets and buckets of fluids come off this guy when he's tying issues he just goes right like and we've we've improved that he actually sweat too much we worked on that a lot early in his career and we got some improvements down to get him to hold on to fluids better that being said I've worked with other individuals in his weight category and it's the opposite right so we can have them literally do the exact same training session together and Scott will dump six pounds and other folks at his size will dump two two and a half so there's a genetic component that is just there and you don't need to worry about it there so can you identify if you are a heavy salt sweater or not well you have a whole bunch of routes for this number one is you can use the old free cost free test of just looking at your clothing and if you're seeing that white residue all over it so you you all have the friend who probably wears that same best baseball hat that they've had for eight years if it is covered in the white junk all over the place that's a sign of a higher salt sweater if the opposite happens and it's like you can pull their clothing back and there's just nothing there and they are maybe a little bit of a lower salt sweater you can also use any number of hydration tests I know that there is some coming out in the market very very soon that can give you theoretically real time measurements is like a CGM would be although I haven't seen any data on if those are accurate or not have a used one yet but there are a number that are out super cheap you know 10, 15, 20 bucks all the way up to a couple hundred dollars where you can buy these patches put them on you and get a reasonably close estimate and again if those things are five or 10 or 20 percent off I don't know I have to see independent data come out first but even if they are you're not worried about the specific milligrams right whether you sweat out you know 1250 milligrams and work out or if it's 1340 it doesn't really matter you're trying to look for big big numbers right are you losing 500 milligrams using three and a half grams or you're at so those things will get you in a ballpark to do exactly what you decide am I high medium or low and there's a lot of them that I've used in the past so that's another way to go about it then what you want to do is probably match your electrolyte intake to something close to what you sweat that's the ideal scenario you can get a lot of information about hydration from blood you can look at like acute markers of dehydration like hemoglobin to medicate if you're like if your hemoglobin is like 15 plus it's funny we've talked about this in a few episodes before but I see that and I'm like man that dude super fit that's like a 15 for him ago would be pretty high 14 or so it would be pretty good for a female that's also the exact same thing as a sign of acute dehydration so I'm out of the thing if you're north at 50 percent you're probably dehydrated so you can get a lot there are also though a lot of biomarkers that can tell you more about chronic dehydration so you can run through those things as well so good blood chemistry tests can tell you a lot you can actually get some insights that you're sodium and potassium I'll be a minute is another fantastic way to measure longer term hydration status now what these amazing globulins that we've sort of talked a lot about so you can do all those things you can also simply measure the body weight preimposed and use a sweat patch or not and use the the freer version of your clothing test and get a rough idea of where you're getting it from so those are good places to start I want to go back though and make sure I wasn't over terrifying the audience too much on a silver piece if you're performing a type of training or exercise or sport in which you're not losing more than 2% of your body weight you don't need to be overly concerned about hydrating in the sport and so we can actually get into some equations for how much water to drink during training right now but if you're again losing less than that it's not critical you can have some fluids it makes you feel better but you're not going to be experiencing tremendous amounts of performance if you're again outplaying a baseball game and it's 50 degrees out you're fine you can drink some water but that's not going to be compromising performance or recovery so we can actually then if you'd like I can go through the three step system for optimizing hydration but I want to make sure I plan that flag so people aren't just terrified that they got to be guzzling down water if they're going to their physical therapist for some stretching that's probably not super important I'd like to see a brief break and acknowledge our sponsor Athletic Greens Athletic Greens is a vitamin mineral probiotic and adaptogen drink designed to help you meet all of your foundational nutritional needs I've been taking Athletic Greens daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're a sponsor of this podcast the reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day is that it helps me meet all of my foundational nutritional needs that is it covers my vitamins my minerals and the probiotics are especially important to me Athletic Greens also contains adaptogens which are critical for recovering from stress, from exercise, from work or just general life if you'd like to try Athletic Greens you can go to Athletic Greens.com slash Huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3K2 again if you'd like to try Athletic Greens go to Athletic Greens.com slash Huberman to claim the special offer I would love for you to tell us what I refer to as the Galpin equation understanding of course that you did not name it the Galpin equation folks scientists can have things named after them but in general it's not reflective of healthy psychology if they name things after themselves correct sometimes yes neuroanatomists used to do that but in any case Dr. Andy Galpin did not name the Galpin equation after himself I named it after him and the Galpin equation for how much fluid to ingest during exercise is you want to take your body weight in pounds and divide that by 30 and you want to consume that number which would be in ounces about every 15 to 20 minutes so in the example of you being 200 pounds you would take 200 divided by 30 which is let's just call that number 7 to be close which means you would consume about 7 ounces of water every 15 or 20 minutes or so okay now as a little bit of a point while I also did not name it I also didn't do the research it's important to point out that other scientists figured these things out I just read their papers and made that derivation of their equation to make it a little bit easier for us folks who do not work on the metric system okay a couple of things first of all I'm not 200 pounds but it doesn't matter how much I weigh because the point is that the listener correct should take their body weight in pounds divided by 30 and just that number of ounces and fluid every 15 minutes and then for those out there outside the US that are accustomed to thinking in mill leaders and leaders not ounces and kilograms not pounds what is the Galpon equation in the metric system this would be 2 milliliters per kilogram which again if you were let's say 200 pounds that's going to be something roughly like we'll call it 90 kilos and so if you did 2 milliliters per kilo you'd be something like 180 milliliters of fluid again every 15 or 20 minutes great and how should people ingest that fluid and of course I would imagine that it's through their mouth I hope there are other orifices that it might suffice but let's not go there they're drinking that water consistently or is it every 15 minutes they slug it back does it matter okay yeah that's very good a handful of things in general when you talk hydration the slower and steady you can go the better in fact the reason these this 2 milliliters per kilogram number came out is because a number of trials were run when they looked at that every 15 minutes just one boldest of it you know in different durations and it is pretty clear that the slower pace one could do it the better so whether you're doing it every 10 minutes or 15 or 20 minutes the reason we actually give that gap is because you have to be also offset a little bit of GI distress in fact like kind of the the 4 golden rules of recovery if you will we use sort of 3Rs you need to rebuild rehydrate and replenish what that really means is you need to have a continuous glucose stream you need to have a continuous amino acid stream you need to hydrate and you need to do all 1 2 and 3 without disturbing your gut too much and so in this particular case it was sort of found that we can hit that level in general and be just fine for most people so I mean a little bit of context the example we gave there in both cases it's something like 6 to 7 ounces for 15 or 20 minutes if you think about that there are 16 ounces in a pound and most water bottles like if you go by a water bottle or a store here it's they generally come in like 16 ounce bottles ish so 6 or 7 ounces is really like a third of a water bottle maybe every 15 or 20 or so minutes so with not some egregious amount of water that you have to slam down now that is influenced heavily by how hydrated you started the session with so how hydrated you came in external factors like heat, humidity, temperature, things like that but that gives you a rough idea that again and these are numbers that you would need to consume to optimize performance at the end of that then is when you would look to see how much I lost like we talked about earlier and then add back that 125% taking into account how much fluid you ingested so if you're 200 pounds and you drink a total of say a pound of water during the training and you started off at 200 and you finished at 198 you actually lost 3 pounds not 2 pounds because you lost 3 you drank 1 during it so your final net number is 2 so now you don't you really need to drink back 125% of that remaining 2 pounds to an half pound something like that these numbers especially that 125 are they're just rough guidelines some actually papers suggests it's all the up to 150% so it's just like an idea don't measure out whether you need 5.5 ounces or 6.2 ounces like it just sort of gives you an idea of where to start all right a few steps every 15 or 20 minutes is close enough I've actually started using the Galpon equation to determine how much fluid I need for mental work given the now robust data that are out there on the relationship between hydration and mental work it's been very effective for me and again there are peer reviewed studies that support the idea that hydration is important for proper mental clarity and energy and focus and that even being slightly dehydrated can disrupt that but if one is drinking so much water that they're frequently going to the restroom and can't comfortably focus on the work they're doing that's also an issue so that's very helpful what are the three most critical features of hydration and then I'd like to move on to some of the more particulars about supplementation and nutrition three parts start hydrated maintain hydration throughout part three is hydrate post to fix it okay we gave you the half ounce per pound of body weight equation so you start the training hydrated we gave you the you know two milliliters per kilogram slash body weight divided by 30 to stay hydrated and we gave the one twenty five percent but I can actually just give you sort of I'm giving you another list here I'm sorry but it is my five step cheater guide for optimizing hydration for performance all right step number one drink a lot of water first thing in the morning this gets everything kick start it's you going it also saves you from having to drink a bunch of water at night which is then going to compromise your sleep what's a lot depending on how big you are the general thing I'll tell people is like one of the very first thing you should do throughout your day you wake up go to the bathroom as you're consuming your sunlight consume water this is maybe chugging a full glass it's honestly what I do it's not the best route but I'll just get back to 16 ounces 16 ounces or so is great it's fine if you're larger you know I'm I'm 165 to 70 pounds depending on what's going on maybe a little higher sometimes if you're 225 pounds maybe that number is 30 ounces right so you just sort of scale up and down and the only reason I say a lot is it just depends on on what you're doing and I also should clarify I don't really literally mean chug just like sips because the faster you drink water the faster it's going to expand blood volume the faster it extends blood volume the faster you get rid of it I don't think a lot of people know that yeah this is maybe this is clarifying this is also we sort of talked about earlier if you drink too much water you'll dilute the system well if you have a diluted system your body's first reaction is to rid of water to bring total blood volume down right remember if you were to go to a doctor and they look to your total blood volume they're like man you're five and a half liters you're going to be like holy crap you're going to be put on a diuretic because you don't have a heart attack blood pressure I wonder if people are drinking a 16 ounce glass of water or other fluid all at once before going to sleep and that's why they're waking up in the middle of the night totally given what you just said probably a better protocol would be to sip on a glass of water in the final hour two hours before sleep you generally the number we say is three hours in the three hours preceding sleep you want to basically limit fluid intake to sipping as needed I think that's I'm going to start that tonight because I wake up generally once per night to use the bathroom and I do drink some fluids before I go to sleep mostly because I'm pretty thirsty at that time yeah but I'm going to start sipping that water in the three hours heading into sleep yeah you so you can actually pay attention to is to go back this is actually I love doing this stuff but if you're waking up at night and you have a very dry mouth okay alright because it can be one of two things you might actually be dehydrated and so then what the most people make is like man my mouth is so dry I keep getting up to drink water at night that makes you then pee too much what that also indicates is probably your mouth breathing so a lot of ways to fix people waking up and you're dating too much night is to tape your mouth and or use a a dilator over your nose and then what happens is you don't feel like you have a dry mouth so you get up to consume any extra water throughout the night so that actually reduces your fluid intake so you don't have the problem of actually now having too much fluid to do it and so there's another reason why mouth taping can really really help if you are having those issues and or snoring those are not benign that's a really like you really should get some work on those something you're not sleeping very well is the way I'll say it doesn't doesn't necessarily mean something in life threatening but it's not a good thing so you're going to run kind of your triaging things back and forth so if you're like I'm waking up to pee a lot but my mouth isn't thirsty okay great then you may actually have just a water consumption issue if it is my mouth is dry but I'm actually waking up and having these large urinations then you're not actually dehydrated you're just breathing through your mouth if you're waking up and your mouth is dry and there's not a lot of pee there then you actually might actually legitimately be under hydrated so a little bit of a game you can play there well that's super informative I think that the point alone that gulping a bunch of water all at once is going to cause you to need to excrete that water soon after is a really important point also for people that are going to give a talk or you don't want to have to get up to use the restroom you have to sit through a long meeting clearly I'm violating all these rules up until right now I've been you know I sort of follow the seagull approach to consuming fluids just gulping in enormous volumes I'm going to start sipping fluids instead what are some of the other rules of hydration? so you're going to wake up you're going to start your day and start hydrated so you're consuming a larger percentage of your water earlier in the day then you get all the performance enhancing effects of water and you don't have to worry about it compromising your sleep so that's step number one also now you're going to start your session closer to hydration all right great number two eat mostly real whole foods why? interesting what you may or not have thought about is a huge determinant of your hydration status is your food choices if you look at different foods for example most fruit water melon water melon is like 95 plus percent water like fantastic source also by the way since we're here it is not extremely high in carbohydrate it's not extremely high in sugar it is by percentage but it's as it is almost exclusively water you're eating it is not something that is extremely dangerous in terms of sugar I their alone probably all the things we've talked about in the six episodes that comment right there will probably blow the internet to pieces and I'll probably get hate mail for life for it but from people sugar melon water throwing watermelons yeah yeah well I don't think the point is that sugar is necessarily bad I think the point is that for most people they're ingesting too much sugar most people and it's interesting often times the people who are justifying the ingestion of sugar exactly the kind of people that should not ingest so much sugar so there's a little bit of a well it used to apply the point here is if you're eating whole real food this is like now we're kind of splitting hairs about those things so so morning hydration yeah now important point here if you compare it to other foods like actually meat is is a very high percentage of fluid depending on how well or long you've cooked it you remember you said earlier or 70% water right so if you're eating meat you're getting actually a big chunk of water as you cook it of course you lose some of that but meat can be like I wouldn't call it a hydrating food item but it is not as low as something like a biscuit which can be actually like 10% water that's why it's like dry and dense which doesn't mean it's bad for you but there if you're eating highly processed foods almost by association that means they've been dehydrated or partially right so you're just getting less total fluid intake in addition they have also been highly salted in general right so now we're in this position where we're under hydrated and highly salted bad spot if you now switch over to mostly again just mostly whole real food ish whatever that means to you then your hydration is going to skyrocket you're going to have a lot so you're eating a ton of food in fact it should be a large percentage of the fluid intake you have actually should be coming from your food and you shouldn't have to be smashing water bottles after water bottle all day in that case though you do need to add salt back so we do see this a lot when people who try to make a transition from maybe a suboptimal nutritional lifestyle and they give up a little bit of other processed food and they come over and they start having problems because they're not actually consuming enough salt so add that back easy way to do that you can use electrolytes and we could talk about those numbers if you want if you just salt your food that you're making you know to taste that's going to get most people in a pretty good spot so start hydrated consume hydrating foods step number two step number three you want to pre hydrate if you know you're going to do a workout session and it's going to be hot and long or one of those things you want to look for that half a pound of per body weight of ounces so that's the number we're looking for to start our hydration session we do that we're pretty much taking care of and then like I said adjust depending on lifestyle, humidity and other factors like that you can use what is called the what system W-U-T I think Bob Kendific has done a ton of research in this area if you want to read more look up his research it is simply weight urine and thirst so in other words check your body weight look at your urine color and gauge your thirst and actually you can use three those three things and those can significantly predict actual hydration status independent of actually measuring osmolidurism or anything like that so those three metrics alone are pretty good indicator of where you're at so you're going to have that normal amount of water plus or minus if you miss that number for whatever reason you get distracted the number we typically tell people is like something like 400 to 500 milliliters of water and the hour preceding the training alright so that's like 13 to 20 ounces so like you know you're going to go work out at three o'clock it's two o'clock and you realize oh man I have not drank much water today you don't need to go smash tons and tons and tons just look for something like that you know call it a bottle of water if you will if that's not enough if you're in a really tough spot you can do more like five to eight ounces 15 or 20 minutes before exercise you want to be really careful about drinking a bunch of water like in the seconds before exercise because you're just going to feel a whole bunch of water bouncing up and down in your stomach and nobody likes that so one to 300 milliliters 15 or so 20 minutes before that assumes you're in this like 185 pound range yes again if you're talking people of much larger size you may need to increase those values accordingly if you do all that then you use the Galapagno equation for your intra workout hydration and you're in a pretty good spot what you want to consume in that is what I call sweat what I mean by that is you don't actually want to necessarily consume water only during a workout you want to consume something that is iso-osmotic to your blood so something that is the same concentration that you lost in your sweat so if you've done a sweat test you would then drink a fluid that is of the same osmolality the short version of that something in the neighborhood of 200 to 400 milligrams of sodium most electrolytes products are going to be something like that now I know element is a thousand milligrams and it's a lot higher but most products now that you're going to find are 250 to 400 milligrams and they're typically in the like two to maybe have to three to one sodium to potassium range coconut water is actually cool it's like basically the opposite like a cup of coconut water I think has something like 200 milligrams of sodium but like 600 milligrams of potassium so like total spoiler alert but we'll use coconut water a lot of hydration just add a little pinch of salt because I'll bring the sodium way back up. Yeah one note about sodium obviously people who have pre hypertension or hypertension want to be careful with their sodium intake in time I've suggested that people might consider ingesting more sodium it's like putting a target on your back and yet the data are pretty good showing that if people are not getting enough sodium their mental clarity their focus their mental stamina their physical stamina really suffers and then people argue well most of us are getting too much salt that often is true for people that are eating a lot of processed foods and not training and not training but for many people who are already sort of health conscious who are training they're largely consuming or I should say they're consuming largely non processed or minimally processed foods and especially for folks who are not ingesting many carbohydrates and are consuming caffeine. A lot of people don't know that carbohydrates hold water and that makes it sound bad it's not necessarily that you're going to get subcutaneous swelling of your body. It's for cover. It's bringing water into your system and it holds water so when you drop carbohydrates starches in particular you urinate a lot more and when you drink caffeine you also urinate a lot more as you pointed out earlier. So you start combining a few things like slightly lower carbohydrate or low carbohydrate eating really quote unquote clean. You're not getting a lot of salt in your food and drinking caffeine and then exercising and then pretty soon those numbers that come along with a gram of sodium in your electrolyte drink are not all that outrageous and what you find is people feel much much better when they're getting enough sodium. And of course I should say that there's no reason why someone has to ingest a supplement like element or something. There are plenty of other ways to bring sodium into your system. You use a pinch of pink salt or Himalayan salt or sea salt or even just table salt in water or just making sure that you're salting your food enough. And I think that there too salt appetite and salt taste is a pretty good guide. If you taste something and it tastes really salty to you, that's an indication that either it's really salty or your salt stores are kind of tapped off. You're okay whereas if you're craving salt and you're thinking, gosh, I really want to put salt on this already salty thing, not necessarily but oftentimes that means that you're salt deficient. So salt appetite is a pretty hardwired set of neural circuits and hormones and I think we would all be wise to learn to tap into the or kind of intuition about salt intake. But of course also to measure your blood pressure etc. Yeah, of course. If you think you have some sort of contraindication there that work with the medical specialist without without question, those situations you laid out that were very real. A lot of people are living like that and so it's important for those folks to understand if you are going through symptoms fatigue, lack of focus, cognitive function, performances in there, then hey, like you may be under salted. And again, actually a good amount of blood chemistry work can unravel that a lot and it can sort of tell you if you're running out of whack. There are a number of folks who are extremely sensitive to sodium in terms of health risk and that is a real thing. Again, work with your individual folks on that. I don't work with anyone for a disease treatment or management at all. I've said that probably four times. I'll say it six more times. I only take people who are healthy and try to make them perform at their best possible level. So it's actually funny to mention that because I was going to give people my recommendation for sodium intake in general throughout the day and then I decided I'm not going to say that because all it's going to do is make all the rest of the people who aren't coming and coming after me for the watermelon comment come after me for that. So all the end of the day's episode of the goal is that everyone's coming after you. But also that everyone has learned something of value. You've already given us tremendous insights and actionable information on creatine and hydration. And along those lines, I'd love for you to tell us about some of the things that we can do with supplementation in order to enhance training by taking certain things before we train. And I also have the question of how long before training should we start thinking about supplying nutrients and supplements for the training session. I'm not sure I actually finished my fiber. Maybe I wasn't clear enough about the last one. So I just want to tie that bow and then we'll go to the next one. Yeah, no, it was probably my fault. So that in addition to the Galapun equation in terms of amount. I'm an recommended at roughly three to one sodium to potassium recommendation. And I gave you some rough numbers things to look at. I actually in all honesty used probably six to 10 different electrolyte companies, depending on the situation, some of them are really good. In the case again, like element, it's nice about that is there's no carbohydrate. However, the downside is there's no carbohydrate. So sometimes I want carbohydrates in the training because as you mentioned, there's significant evidence going back actually several decades on the benefit of carbohydrate during exercise. So if you're in a situation where you're trying to again maximize actual exercise performance, you especially if it is either a long duration, so more than two hours or extremely high intensity. And this has to be well north of 100% of your VO2 max. And that situation as we talked about in the endurance episode, you can actually start having a document in performance because of a drop of muscle glycogen. Glitter glycogen starts coming down. If that's the case, augmenting with the carbohydrates during the training that is going to enhance performance, it's going to do what we call spare the liver. And it's going to keep my second rule of my four, which is maintain glucose ingestion, is going to keep that going. In general, what you're going to find is the number is like a five to nine percent glucose concentration in your fluid, which turns out to be like exactly the number that most sports drinks have, as well as I think that's pretty much exactly what coconut water is. The downside of sports drinks, since we're here, is they actually tend to be under salted, and so that they don't provide enough of them. If you look at the numbers, they're going to say something like 60 to 100 grams of carbohydrate per hour is the target. And now if you're using the sort of gulf in equation and you're splitting that up into 15 minute intervals, it's something again like 20 or so grams of carbs per 15 to 20 minutes, if you're doing again an hour long plus training. So admittedly, 100 grams is a bit much for some folk depending on your size. So I would recommend starting in that 60 gram or so range again per hour total is what you want to get to. And only in the situation in which muscle glycogen depletion is becoming a limiting factor to performance. So the other benefit of that is, as you mentioned, that actually drives water into the cell. And so you're going to be in that nice sweet spot of you're actually keeping glucose going, which is going to enhance performance and you're helping hydration at the same time. So the other little part that's important to pay attention to here is the type of carbohydrate matters. So you can use actually a whole combination of things called resistance starches, which I will use for a long bouts of exercise, but in the middle of the workout, you're going to want to focus on glucose and fructose, mostly glucose. Typically, at least a two or three to one ratio of glucose to fructose. And the reason is those actually get into tissue through separate transporters. And so what happens is once the glucose transporters get full, you can't bring anything else in. However, since fructose comes in a separate route, you can maximize total carbohydrate intake by using two different unique forms. There's a lot of ways you can do this, but this is where the momentous fuel product is specifically has that exactly in it. So it's fantastic. You can use food, no problem. You can use the combination of things like honey and different easily absorbable and usable and things that you can actually like maybe put in a drink to get away with. So there's lots of routes for it, but you want to look in that sort of combination of five to nine percent roughly glucose for there. So you do need to train your gut. So do not do anything. And there's a generally a good rule. Do not do anything in your competition that you've never done in practice. So try these food items, try these amounts, the carbohydrate numbers, try the sodium numbers, try the total amount of water. Start low. You can always increase. What you don't want to do is have to run out during the middle of your spin class and sprint to the bathroom and hope nobody's in your way. Which in the lab we've seen will just say accidents like that occur more than once. So just be careful of your stomach. I'd like to take a brief break to acknowledge our sponsor inside tracker. Inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long term health and well-being can only be analyzed from a quality blood type. One issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, however, is that you get information back about various levels of lipids and hormones and metabolic factors, etc. But you don't know what to do with that information. Inside tracker makes knowing what to do with all that information exceedingly easy. They have a personalized platform that lets you see what your specific numbers are, of course. But then also what sorts of behavioral dos and don'ts, what sorts of nutritional changes, what sorts of supplementation would allow you to bring those levels into the ranges that are optimal for you. If you'd like to try inside tracker, you can visit inside tracker.com slash Huberman to get 20% off any of Inside Tracker's plans. Again, that's inside tracker.com slash Huberman to get 20% off. I realized that jumped the gun a little bit asking about supplementation for before, during and after workout, because what I neglected to ask about was training in the fasted state. This is something that we talked about in an earlier episode, but I think it's worth highlighting now. Sometimes the best way to supplement, if you will, a workout or pre-workout is ingesting nothing. I'm one of these people. I actually prefer to do my weight training somewhere between 7 and 8 a.m. each morning. Sometimes a little earlier, sometimes a little bit later. I drink fluid, water, and I do ingest caffeine prior to those training days. On days when I don't train, I do, as I often recommend, people do, delay my caffeine intake, 90 to 120 minutes after waking. But in any event, it's water and caffeine, yerbremate, or coffee, or some sort of stimulant for weight training workouts. And generally not for cardiovascular training workouts, although sometimes yes. So I'm training fasted. That said, I'm ingesting carbohydrate the night before to make sure that I have glycogen stores that are topped off. And so it's fasted, but with that caveat. What are your thoughts on training fasted? And what I just described is fasted overnight, but some people are training in the afternoon. And they may opt to not eat anything in the, you know, two to four hours prior to training or maybe even longer. I personally find that caffeine hits my system a lot better when I'm fasted. Better meaning it just seems to have more of a potent effect. There are some reasons for that. And of course we dissuade people from ingesting caffeine too late in the day because they'll disrupt sleep. So I'm not saying fast for three hours than during caffeine, but who knows? Maybe that's in your protocol. The simple version of this question is, what are your thoughts on training fasted? And if people are going to train fasted, how should they modulate their fluid intake if it all? What happens with exercise in the endurance and metabolism episode? We walk through in the fact that no matter what you're using for fuel, carbohydrates or fat or even other potential sources. The end product of all of those is ATP, CO2 and water. Right? So you're trying to make ATP. That is the fuel for exercise. Now ATP is a dentists in triphosphate. So one, two, three phosphates on top of an dentists. Well, what you may have not put together is if you hydrolyze ATP and you break off one of those phosphates, you now have ADP. If you do it again, you have AMP, a dentists in monophosphate. If you do it one more time, now you just have a dentists in. And if you have then, therefore run through a lot of exercise, burned a lot of energy, you have increased the amount of dentists in that's floating around. Now, if you have a high concentration of adenosine, what's that going to make you want to do? That's going to bind to certain receptors. And when we know when those receptors get bound to, you fall asleep. Bingo. Caffeine will competitively bind to those receptors. Therefore, that's why caffeine stops you from feeling like you want to go to sleep. Right? So we have a very clear relationship between exercise fuel. In fact, if you look at the literature, there's a pretty clear relationship between the more caloric expenditure and different sports and the higher amount of hours needed for sleep. So there is a nice tie between how hard you're exercising, how much energy you're burning, how much you need to sleep, stimulants, which brings us all the way back to your question of fueling. So do I need to fuel prior to my exercise about if you're going to be limited in your exercise about by fuel, then fueling is necessary. One way or the other, if it is a type of training that is not, then it's not going to matter. And so the examples we gave, if you're doing, if you're going to go do a 30 second about a maximum exertion and you're going to do it one time, you don't need to worry about fueling at all. We're eating within your workout because only 30 seconds. You don't need to worry about hydration, post-sector size, you don't need to worry about recovery. Total energy expenditure was nothing. If you're going to go, you know, you're going to go practice, you're going to go to the driving range and practice your golf swing. You don't need to worry about it. The total amount of energy expenditure is just not high. In fact, in that case, you might want to keep it somewhat low because you want to keep blood glucose fairly even. And you don't want to bring it into the system. You certainly wouldn't want to use stimulants, right? Because you may get over exerted inside. In all of these things, we probably should have started off our conversation with this. In terms of macro nutrients, the total amount throughout the day is more important generally than the timing of them, which is why you can do things like have a bunch of carbohydrate at night, not eat the next morning and lift and be just fine. It doesn't matter that you didn't have them in a few hours before your muscle glycogen is topped off your liver is glycogen is topped off your absolutely fine. You have plenty of fuel, even if you're to wait a few more hours. In fact, even if you were to do conditioning, you're probably fine. I have plenty of athletes that prefer to do many of their training sessions faster than morning for personal reasons, not because it enhances performance. But if it doesn't enhance or harm it, then it's a personal preference thing fine. If you're going to go to a session, though, where you're going to be really concerned with muscle glycogen, a patient, again, you can go back that episode to learn different types when those thresholds hits and what you're worried about. Then a feeling would be important. You would either need to have something before the session or consume it during the session. One of the other things we'd like to say here is recovery starts during the previous workout. If you're working out right now and you optimize nutrition right now, even if you don't necessarily need it for the current workout, if you can get ahead on recovery, then you're going to be fine the next day. And the differentiation here between carbohydrate and protein is important. So the total amount of protein you ingest throughout the day is probably a bigger determinant for things like muscle growth than the timing. So the post-exercise animal like window, it doesn't necessarily matter. Carbohydrate is different. The timing of that does matter. It needs to be around and available. And maximise both hydration and muscle glycogen re-synthesis, which is restoring the muscle glycogen you burned during exercise. I also work with athletes that train multiple times a day. So in those particular cases, recovery window is half what you normally have. So if you're in a situation where you have two or three days before you work out again, you don't need to worry about getting carbohydrate and before or during or after. Because by the time you go to train again, you will have restored your muscle glycogen levels easily. However, if you're training every day or twice in a day, then the timing of carbohydrate really starts to matter. In that case, I see no reason to not ingest those nutrients either before, during or after. You don't need to necessarily do it, but you can. The general rule of thumb I give is something like this. If you're doing something where you're trying to really work hard, whether this is hypertrophy training or a lot of endurance. Energy expenditure is going to be high, potential muscle damage is high and or energy utilization is high. What you want to look for is a number, something in the area of like half a gram of carbohydrate per pound of body weight. So you weigh 200 pounds. You want to make sure that either pre-mid or post or total. You bring in 100 grams of carbohydrate. It's just a very rough number to start. Protein is about half of that. So it's about a quarter of your body weight. So those numbers would be if you're 200 pounds, make sure you have 100 grams of carbs and 50 grams of protein. And again, it doesn't necessarily have to be before or during or after. And you'll be in a good spot. All you need to do then is alter what I do, I should say, is alter the amount of carbohydrate based on energy expenditure. So a lower energy and easier workout instead of having 100 grams of carbs, I might tack that down to 75 or even 50 and be at a one to one carb protein ratio. If it was even harder, more son, hotter outside, more fluid loss, I might go from 100 grams of carbs up to 150 or 200 and get closer to like a 3 to 1 or 4 to 1 carbohydrate to protein ratio. So those are the numbers that I generally go by. Well, as I take a sip of my double espresso, Americano here, I'd love for you to tell us about stimulants. Sure, there's no shortage of these in most of our lives. And of course, you can cover the health benefits of it later. Maybe you have an episode. Yes, we have an episode on caffeine and it does have certain health benefits, although one has to use caffeine correctly in order to drive those. So there's caffeine is the easy one to start with and we won't believe at the point here, the evidence is strong. It has an regurgent effect. You can take it at whatever dosage is reasonable for you. And of course, there is a bit of a learning curve there, such that obviously the more you take it, the more you need to take, even though there's actually some recent evidence showing even folks who are acclimated to it, we'll still see an regurgent benefit, even though they don't feel a big boost of it. Typically, that takes 30 to 45 minutes or so, but it's highly dependent upon the person. Some people can smell coffee and immediately feel better. And that's probably working actually through a different mechanism of anticipation. But you can take it there. Half life of it is, you know, four to six hours or something like that. It can totally depends on the person. So don't let it run your sleep. But if you take it prior to performance, it has a noticeable effect on particularly endurance. A maximum strength, maybe less, well, quite clearly less so. In fact, the data are mixed there on whether it actually does anything for peak strength, although I think most people would suggest that, you know, you're going to take it prior to trying to truly lift is high as trying to lift a one-optition max or similar. But most of the document effects are on the endurance based activities. Yes. So my read of the literature in terms of performance enhancing effects of caffeine are that one to three milligrams. I want to make sure that people hear the units correctly before you blitz themselves out of that caffeine one to three milligrams per kilogram of body weight, about 30 minutes prior to exercise. Has a definite performance enhancing effect. It also has a definite mental performance enhancing effect, especially when people who are regular caffeine users have abstained from caffeine for anywhere from two to 15 days. And that's an extremely rare circumstance. But even if they have not, it appears that one to three milligrams per kilogram of body weight of caffeine taken about. I can't it's not super precise as far as I can see. About 30 minutes before the event starts can really enhance reaction time and power output and as well as, as you mentioned, endurance. When I was researching the caffeine episode, one interesting caveat that I discovered was that if people are not caffeine adapted, they are not regular users of caffeine. The sudden introduction of caffeine can really degrade performance mostly because people don't know how to operate at that high level of autonomic arousal. Have you ever observed that? Yeah, 100%. In fact, there's actually data going up as high as 10 milligrams per kilogram of body weight, which is in fact, once you cross the five milligrams per kilogram threshold, you will start seeing performance decrements. So there's absolutely such a thing of ruining your performance with too much caffeine. So most people listening to this, if you're thinking, wow, they said caffeine, I'm all in and then you just stop listening. And now you go for your quad espresso shot before you're every time you go to work out. You're probably passing that threshold. If you think about those numbers, one to three milligrams per kilogram body weight, if you weigh 100 kilograms, that's 220 pounds. That'd be something like two to 500 milligrams of caffeine, which is like a pretty high amount. But, you know, a coffee is going to get you close and espresso is going to get you somewhat in that ballpark, depending on sources of. So you don't really need to go and blister your brain with caffeine. And in fact, if you do, it's quite common. And in fact, likely that you'll actually make performance worse. Yeah, the amount of caffeine in different coffees and sodas, et cetera, of course, varies. One thing that people ought to know is that the smallest of commercially available coffees at the most popular commercial vendor. Generally contain anywhere from 250 to 350 milligrams of caffeine. What that means is that the so-called medium and the large contain as much as 500 milligrams or one gram of caffeine. So for you morning, large coffee at commercial vendor drinkers, if you're wondering why you get a headache if you're 30 minutes late on that caffeine or if you can't access that caffeine at all, or even if you're drinking coffee, excuse me, from another source, you're finding like, oh, it's really not doing it for me. It's because the amount of caffeine in the now commercially sold coffees is exceedingly high. It's about two or three times higher than the standard lookup tables that you'll see on the internet. So I'm not saying that to demonize caffeine. We can pretty quickly adapt to and form a tolerance to caffeine. Some people never really can get over the jitters. Other people are just fine with even a thousand milligrams of caffeine, but only because they've been drinking a lot of caffeine consistently. It's also wildly inconsistent from location to location, the brew type, the functionality. So yeah, that stuff can be very hard to figure out what's happening. There's only one way really to objectively measure caffeine and that's used caffeine tablets. And they work pretty well. Actually, someone I know whose prominent in the podcast space uses 100 to 200 milligrams of caffeine in tablet form combined with tea. So they've now conditioned themselves to think that herbal tea actually has this caffeinating effect. But tablet form caffeine while I'm not recommending it to outright. It is going to give you the best sense of how much caffeine you can tolerate and how much is performance enhancing or is performance degrading. There's actually another line of supplementation we can go down here, which is not technically stimulant, but it's something I use to help performance when you don't want caffeine. And so this thinks specifically if you're one of those folks who have to exercise at night and you want a little bit of boost for your training, but you don't want to have caffeine because it messes up your sleep. And this is when you can turn to the whole like citrally and arginine nitric oxide sort of route and skip the explanation there. But effectively what happens is that your oxide is this wonderful compound that causes vasodilation. And of course, that's going to aid then in transporting nutrients in and out of the cell. So it has an erogetic effect. You have a number of ways you can go about this. Some of them have more pros and cons than others and there are more and more data coming out specifically on citrally and more recently. If you look though in my opinion, the most consistent evidence for the most consistent effect is in the supplement of beetroot or beetroot juice or extractor something like that. So you can find those supplements and they tend to again, the pretty effective and enhancing performance specifically anything moderate to longer duration endurance performance and they are not a stimulant so they won't ruin your sleep that much. One note of caution for those of you that are interested in citrally or beetroot because they are in the arginine pathway. If you're somebody who has a predisposition to cold source oral cold source that is or other forms of cold source that because activation of the arginine pathway can exacerbate some of the neural related aspects of cold source. And that's because the viruses that cause those cold source actually live on neurons, then you want to be very cautious with citrally and especially hydro citrally. I can really amplify that the cold source response. What about non stimulant yet focus enhancing supplements, things like alpha GPC for example, I routinely use 300 to 600 milligrams of alpha GPC prior to hard physical training. Typically weight training, but occasionally I'll take 300 milligrams of alpha GPC prior to a mental work about less often these days because I kind of reserve it for physical training and I don't tend to use it every day. Maybe once every you know third or fourth workout combined with caffeine so that combination is pretty pretty potent. I find and so technically because it's a colonergic agonist it's not a stimulant in the traditional sense. But it has a focusing and an alertness promoting aspect to it. What are your thoughts on those sorts of compounds? There is not much human performance exercise performance data on those there are certainly cognitive functioning tests on those. So you're not going to find a lot of information though there isn't none. We actually will use many of these substances you can globally call them neutropics, which is you know any substance that specifically only has brain function. Is a roughly to think about it will use them prior to more challenging bouts of training. This is something that will pull out say on sparring day only. Or the most important training session or session when you're trying to work on pitch command or when you're trying to enhance work on your shot and as a basketball player or you're really trying to improve a certain swing is a golfer or something like that. But we do not use them every day we do not use them every person so yeah we will use those there are not stimulants but they can be performance enhancing. And another kind of way to think about this is if you're in the case of caloric restriction so whether you're trying to lose weight or we're actually trying to control weight for weight purposes in terms of sports where you have to be in a certain white class or something like that. What we may not be able to give you food in fact we may not be able to give you stimulants because of the sleep thing or because we're already like max on a sybilance. Now we can go this route and so you least like mentally you're a little bit there and you're more likely to be alert and focused and you can train harder despite the fact we didn't actually change fuel that's a little bit of a short game in terms of that's not your permanent solution you eventually need to bring calories up or whatever other change your training or whatever you're going to do but it can work in a little bit. It can work in a nice short pinch i'm very interested to learn from you about fatigue reducers and i'm hoping that rodeo rosa will come up in the conversation. Yeah great let's just start right there then there's actually a lot of research on this despite most people not having heard of it i think i mentioned in a previous episode i've used it a lot over many many years. You have to be a little bit careful of it there's well first of all no we should have said this at the onset no supplement is a panacea right nothing's going to work for every rodeo is no no different it can have a number of effects if you look across the literature you're going to find generally somewhere between a small benefit to little benefit but not often is it detrimental with a few exceptions i know of a handful of papers that would be to specifically where it may actually reduce muscular endurance. Okay fine if you think about what's happening is one of the benefits that has been seen so far with rodeo is is helpful at managing cortisol but cortisol suppression is not necessarily a good thing we talked about how if you do an acute about a stress cortisol will go go way up and that is a sign of acute stress however a sign of long term excessive stress is cortisol suppression. And so this is a thing to be really careful of is if you're feeling down or lethargic or tired and you think your adrenals are messed up and then you start taking cortisol modulators you could be making the problem worse because now your cortisol is actually suppressed and now you're taking these things to blunt it or keep it low and and you're you continue to feel lethargic and lack of desire and libido and focus in sort of all these things so cortisol is not a bad thing we want this to be going up and down in the amounts that we want so we want to do that. So if we're for thinking about like for example waking up. You would want generally something like a 50% reduction in the first hour in terms cortisol concentrations however if you're extremely suppressed already going down is only going to be a problem so rodeo is is has a good evidence base to support it for that you'll see actually a number of studies that have looked at it in a whole host of areas for benefit so something good to do the difficult part with rodeo to be quite honest is getting it from my. High quality brand and source it's difficult to get as a single source which is a very very important thing to do is supplements is try to get them sourced alone rodeo that typically comes in combination with any other herbals or other stuff yeah adrenal support and such etc. Also then getting them then third party certified which for most folks is not necessary but for any athletes and you go through drug testing systems you should not take any supplement at all that does not have some sort of third party certification so those are the challenges that being said if you've ever ran into somebody who's taken rodeo and they're like I didn't do anything for me it's possible that's nothing works for everyone and also could be just very poor quality sourcing so if you look at the there have been a number of papers on. It's perception of fatigue and you you sort of mentioned that you felt pretty immediate effects of taking a few times yeah i'm fairly sensitive supplements but i started taking. Rodeola before workouts and found that I could push much harder much longer through the workout normally I would it or typically before taking it. That is in sessions where I did not take it I would be able to work out very hard for 20 minutes or so the next 10 minutes I could get some work output and then the remaining period of time it was kind of a tapering off now granted these are very intense training sessions these are not the endurance training sessions. These are the weight training sessions that one one time per week per body part type sessions what I've noticed is I can complete the entire 60 minutes with with minimal fatigue now I mean obviously I hit fatigues within sets and of course you know I get you remain human despite taking it but I found to be very useful and I've been using it whenever I use alpha to you PC prior prior to workouts and I've been impressed by. By overall I do want to highlight something that you said because I think it's so so vitally important which is that using single ingredient formulations for most things is critical to figuring out what works for you what doesn't what dosages you need being able to take things to on one off two days on one day off for instance being able to increase dosage in the morning and then come maybe reduce the dosage and combine with something else in the afternoon. Single ingredient formulations are pretty much the only way to do that there's perhaps only one supplement that I take at all and that's athletic greens is there been a regular podcast sponsor for a long time that is a cocktail of many many things and those are all adaptogens as well as some probiotics and vitamins and things like that so I'm not opposed to blends where the blends include a lot of nutrients that are synergistic but for all pill capsule based supplements where I'm looking for a very targeted effect and it's not just a lot of things that I'm going to do. So I'm not just about some foundational nutrition I really believe strongly that single ingredient formulations are the way that you can build a rational approach to supplementation and also make adjustments if something isn't making you feel better and also make adjustments is something really working for you so for instance some people might take alpha GPC 300 milligrams and not feel anything go up to 600 milligrams not feel anything maybe just feel kind of they don't like it other people like myself took 300 milligrams of alpha GPC the first time was like wow this really puts me in the zone. But I want to be really careful how often I use it I did mention I go up to 600 milligrams occasionally but that really puts me on the outer threshold of kind of overall levels of focus and amped up such that if I drink too much caffeine it can tilt me over the edge. So I encourage people to become scientists of themselves and the only way to do that is to try and limit the number of variables and the final point is that I think that single ingredient formulations are by far the best in terms of changing things over time you know this could be women during their menstrual cycle might find that during certain phases of the cycle they're more sensitive to certain things than not others and for men and women it may be that certain times of year even and certain supplements might go better closer to sleep some earlier in the day and on and on and on there's just no real way in my opinion to have a supplementation protocol that involves lots and lots of blends one or two blends okay but lots of blends I think that's the best way to do that is to do that. So I think that's actually that's potentially dangerous territory. Yeah I mean just take rodeo as a good example I know a new meta analyses came out just in the last few months looking at it and they found in general you see again a slight to moderate improvement and everything from power output to fatigue resistant antioxidant effects to endurance performance. It's like okay great maybe there's a little bit here now let's say you went to do it in the only way you could access rodeo is in combination with that and some lines main and you know some other of these adapted things and it's like wait a minute I just wanted to take this to get a better workout but now it also came with the stimulant or this cortisol suppressor or cortisol activator well now also you can't take it at night or you can't take it in the morning because you're already you're already head coffee your options are just way limited so I think the biggest part of it is that I think that's the best way to do that is to get a better workout but now it also came with the stimulant or this cortisol suppressor or cortisol activator well now also you can take it at night or you can't take it in the morning because you're already you're already head cough your your options are just way limited so I think the biggest part of it is all that is you if something doesn't feel good you have absolutely no idea you don't know if it was a rollo you don't know if it was the bus well you know it's in there you don't know if it was any of the other things that were smashed in there or it could be something as simple as the the citric acid they use like some other combination of thing and now here you are thinking that some supplement that actually works for you doesn't and you throw that out of your repertoire for the rest of your life which is you know not the biggest crime but it's not needed and you're not really going to know so yeah I fully stamped you can look back at my course lectures for the last decade and you will see like stamped number one on the supplementless sections is make sure you're taking single ingredient supplements at all costs the last part about that too is you're more likely to ensure the amount that is on the label is correct so if you're taking rodeola and it says you know it's 100 milligrams in there and if that's only thing that's in there you're more likely than not to actually get something close now they're never perfect but it would be close if it's in a combination of 20 other things you actually don't have any idea that's in there in fact there have been many papers on melatonin and vitamin D and a number of other supplements in which when you actually just pull them off the shelf these are standard studies where they would go and buy said like 20 to 25 different supplements in the case of melatonin and will actually measure the amount of melatonin actually in them and despite the fact that the label says five milligrams they can be up to a 500 to a thousand fold actual concentration in that supplement and then you wonder why some people react great melatonin some people that absolutely destroys you and this is also why like we'll actually we'll see this constantly what people will have like 500 times the upper limit of melatonin the morning after when the half life is supposed to be more like 90 minutes it should be totally gone but we're seeing extremely high and not even talking like double I'm talking 10 20 30 X the upper limit range from melatonin the next morning and it's like well what are you taking is like I got this melatonin at X store or X website you know like holy cow so I'm not opposed to melatonin theoretically but you have to be careful with that one in particular so any supplement has that to be true so you want to buy them from as many places that you can that are high quality and if they are third party tested even if you're not a performance athlete I want to stress even if you're not a performance athlete third party certified and test the supplements are you're less likely to just just get wildly high concentrations or low concentrations of active ingredients so relative to other ones when you might get for cheaper but you could be totally wrecking yourself by getting you know 50 milligrams of melatonin every night and not realizing it so then of course the next morning you drown yourself in caffeine and then you can see what death cycle you're in now yeah and people could look for third party certification on the packaging and some websites will allow you to zoom in on the bottle beforehand it's largely listed on on certain vendor websites a brief point about supplement cost and blends and a promises will be a brief point different ingredients meaning different types of supplements have widely varying costs in order to you know create the to get them to manufacture them so often you'll find is that blends will include the least amount of the most expensive ingredient right not always the case there's some there certain exceptions to this and I mentioned some blends that I like a few minutes ago that are for foundational nutrition adaptogens and probiotics athletic greens of course just being one of several examples out there but when it comes to say asleep blend or a pre workout blend there are some decent products out there but a lot of them tend to put in more of the least expensive ingredients and less of the ones that you're actively seeking and so those tend to be caffeine tends to be a kind of a buffer against the other things meaning if you pre workout putting caffeine in there isn't necessarily a bad thing but it has five other things in there oftentimes what manufacturers will check out the cheat on is the actual amount of the things that are costly so again single ingredient formulations for 80% of your supplements I think is really the way to go and the other thing that I know is going to come up as we're talking about all these supplements is this issue of dependency I often get this question and when I solicit for questions on social media in anticipation of this so number of people said okay so if you take a sleep formulation do I need to take it every night if I don't take it will I have an incredibly hard time sleeping if I take a pre workout every time I train will I need it it's a great question some people will take supplement holidays as they may be called for a couple of days each week back to back some people take them straight through I myself take as a sleep cocktail we've described this it's magnesium and things this is not one ingredient these are multiple ingredients in fact precisely because some of them are not precisely because some people who have sleep walking and vivid dream issues can't take the Indian before bed in any case I've had times when I either forgot my supplements that's rare where I just didn't have what I needed or just simply took a break for a night and it was not a problem but in terms of pre workout I do think that people become dependent on being in that really ramped up state but I don't think we view all this as true dependency I'm like addiction right I mean I define addiction as a progressive narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure so you know I suppose people could get addicted to pre workout but it seems a little unlikely more likely there would be a dependency such that if you didn't have your pre workout might feel like I'm not motivated to train so what are your thoughts on I'm taking little holidays from supplements and varying frequency of supplement intake in particular as it relates to stimulants and fatigue reducers the end goal anytime I coach somebody is to get them into a physiological state in which they require no or close to no supplementation that's the target we should really be in a position to where our lifestyle our sunlight exposure our stress management our physical activity our sleep on our hydration and our whole food nutrition provide us almost everything we need now look again there are some foundational items that we can give people we put together a little bundle actually for this the basic things that you can go look at but that's the goal right so the target is to be let your physiology run the guy your physiology is way smarter than we are even if I take a bunch of biomarkers from you your physiology still knows better than those few markers can tell me so that's always where we're ending up I actually personally don't like people being in a position that they have to take a supplement for anything so I don't like it if you have to take a supplement to have a good night of sleep I don't like it if you have to have a supplement to train we will use any of these stimulants very very carefully with any of the athletes we work with and certainly for the non athletes because at least the athletes we have an end date we have a fight schedule we have a season we have a game you're going to pitch whatever when you don't have that it's sort of like you're in this endless cycle of oh you're just going to do that all day every day we don't really need to be in that spot so what I the way that I describe my philosophy is I will use those short term tactics to symptom and if I have to so if somebody comes to me and like you're feeling awful and we've got to get through the home okay great maybe we'll give you something for sleep immediately to get you sleeping that allows us to then come back and work on the causal problem right so this is what is what is why are you having a hard time sleeping anyways if you have to take a nine cocktail supplement to sleep then all we're doing is is blinding the reason why are you in that position to begin with right so we see this all the time whether it is sleep problems or that is cortisol or testosterone the question is well why is that low now we may give you something again to manage it immediately but the task the mystery I'm going to try to unveil is why why is it there to begin with this could be something like this is natural for you and your lack of energy and your lack of energy is something else or it could be actually it is not a natural level for you but something is suppressing it any number of you've got some infection going on there's some allergic reaction to something in your environment there's a mold mercury like that one comes up a lot you'll see mercury in folks and that's causing a lot of problems or any number of heavy metals or toxins any host of things psychological distress bad daily habit you don't ever see the sun like you don't ever sweat you don't ever drink we was talking about so many things so I'm always going to hunt for that and I hate using this phrase it's highly maligned for a good reason but root cause all right so we're trying to find that is like are we making sure that we're not causing this problem and I'm not going to want to give you a supplement to cover up something if we're not even trying to solve the problem of what's being there that being said and my that concern about people taking a multi vitamin just all throughout no not really am I concerned about people taking a creating no like go ahead those those ones are generally pretty fine to just take but anything else I want a reason I really don't like giving people anything in a super physiological concentration or a super food concentration right so again an amount you wouldn't find in a normal food dosage unless we have really a specific reason some of these things are more problematic others are less problematic so when an ant to answer the question of dependency you have a combination of actual physiological dependency caffeine like that actually creates a physiological dependency versus a emotional or psychological dependency or just a I like drinking this like that's my habit that's my routine there's a fancy scientific phrase for that but it doesn't matter so yeah we want to get off that and like again my personal philosophy is I don't want you to depend on anything I want to create extremely resilient people and I want to create physiological resilience we actually have a fancy little algorithm we used to measure that in people and so we can actually calculate that number and the goal of us is to push that number higher so that we don't have to have anything so many situations pop up in your real life that you're not going to have your supplement or you're not going to have your routine or you're not going to have your journal or whatever but also for the long term I don't want to create a situation in which this is a short term success that you have to now do that the rest of your life now let's just get out of the way let's fix the problem if there is something symptom management that's real while we're actually searching for better foundational habits the last thing I want to say about this is if you're only covering symptom you're really missing signal right which is if you're constantly tired throughout the day and all you're doing is giving yourself a number of alpha GPCs and caffeine etc even though there's good literature are you really just using that to allow your poor sleep hygiene to happen if they took those away I bet you you would actually start addressing your sleep if that's the cause right or I your stress or your poor hydration like you would go hunting for the problem and so like you want to walk a fine line here going like hey look is an athletic greens supplement that big a deal now probably not but wait a minute am I actually now covering up the pain point that is maybe needed it's a signal to actually get my ass in gear to go make one of these changes whatever it needs to be so I know I've got like a little bit meta on you a little bit philosophical that's honestly how I approach it yeah I think it's really important a friend of mine who's a physician has a great saying which is better living through chemistry still requires better living oh that's cool that's so good you know and it pertains also to things like antidepressants and ADHD drugs and things that sort most all of those things were developed as tools to allow people to move from a maladaptive state maladaptive is hard to define but think about in any domain of life you can either be back on your heels flatfooted or forward center of mass and there are times when people are so compromised nor chemically that they need to use pharmacology in order to get into a flat footed position you know they're really back on their heels flat footed or forward center mass but the idea was always that those things were developed as things to allow people to engage in the sorts of behaviors that can produce the same sorts of neurochemical shifts and the people are thinking well what sorts of behaviors can induce these neurochemical shifts I'll just zoom out myself for a moment here and say I am a big proponent I believe you are as well if I may in doing behavioral tools first whenever possible really establishing good habits the do's end don'ts which we've talked a lot about in this series and in this episode then excellent nutrition which involves do's and don't volume food choice timing all the factors and then also supplementation and also there sometimes a case for prescription drugs certainly and often brain machine interface or body machine interface measuring stuff using devices but the foundation of behaviors and good nutrition are really truly foundational and it's hard in anything to skip steps but supplements and prescription drugs are one place where people often skip steps and then they don't actually learn how to cultivate the best behavioral practices including the don'ts as you mentioned and then just one more point along these lines you know you talked about taking anything for energy is really disruptive to the system and it is because especially caffeine while it has its uses and even health benefits it's really borrowing it's against the adenosine system with interest and so because caffeine acts as an adenosine antagonist effectively while caffeine is present in those receptors you don't feel as sleepy you have more energy your reaction time goes down memories and hence focus performance of all kinds yes but then when that caffeine is dislodged from the receptor then the adenosine can act even more potently at those receptors so it's sort of like being able to borrow against the normal variations and wakefulness and sleep and this is why we encourage people if they're not training first thing in the morning to push their caffeine intake out about 90 to 120 minutes after waking so they can clear some of that adenosine in the morning which tends to happen even after we wake up people can listen to episodes on master sleep or perfect sleep or the caffeine episode to understand more about that but the the final thing I just want to say here and then it prompts a question is you know in thinking about supplement protocols I think a lot of people assume that once they start taking something they're going to have to take it all the time and one idea perhaps is that people have some alpha GPC around that they could take and granted to be great if people could try things without having to buy a whole product I think companies hopefully you're listening to this and will give people a sample to see if something works for them and then give them an opportunity to try it to have things around but not necessarily assume you're going to take it every time right some things you take every day foundational nutrition supplements for instance but then also to take a look at how well you're eating or not eating right at times when I'm eating much better I can consume you know low sugar fermented foods which are great for the gut microbiome I consume less probiotics if ever I've been really compromised for whatever reason then I will take pill form probiotics but I don't take those all the time because I get them from food and from certain green you know green strings like athletic greens and so forth so I think that nutrition and supplementation are are tethered in this way in my mind and I don't think that most people think of supplementation is something that where you can induce a lot of variability in when and how you take them but as far as I'm concerned as long as they're single ingredient formulations you can be you can use supplements once a week if you want you can use them seven days a week you could use them twice a day four times a day every day or you could use them not at all agreed yeah some of them will have an effect randomly like that others will not be able to do that and we talked about creating being one of them it's if you're going to take it once or so week then there's I mean basically no benefit that's a very good point very creatine said beta alanine as another fantastic example of something you need to take consistently if you want some sort of benefit it needs to be built up in muscle we need to use that to create a carnaseen which is what's actually going to help us with our fatigue management we call it like an acid buffer so in our previous metabolism episode we talked about that being a major cause of fatigue the wonderful part of the one of the reasons why beta alanine works so effectively is it blocks that build up so that is an example of another one that you would want to take other things like fish oil you could certainly skip a day here and there it wouldn't be that big a deal I also do support your comment if you can take absolutely none of these things and be just fine in terms of and we'll come back maybe to beta alanine in a second in terms of some other fun stuff my colleague Greg a sicky ran a really cool number of studies looking at how exercise actually altruz that got microbiome this is actually an area that we probably have 300 stool samples sitting in my freezer in my lab goodness another reason to pause before entering your lab yeah another reason to not apply to come be one of my graduates unless you want to do that we actually have a number we've applied for a couple of grants to look more into this specifically with females so hopefully we can get that funded but nonetheless you can actually see some like pretty traumatic and I say that word on purpose changes in the gut microbiome this one in particular study I was thinking of that Greg did is he looked at the changes pre post an ultra marathon and even within a single bout of exercise I came with some of the markers but I know one of the markers was specifically increased by like 14,000 percent after a single bout of exercise now this is an ultra marathon this is like like totally absurd amount of exercise relative to a normal people would be would be but that number I remember like it was like 14,000 to 129 percent or like something some random number like that of something meaningful yeah something meaningful I can't remember which marker that was that it changed I know streptococcus was in there streptococcus went up like maybe something more like 30 or 40 or 50 percent the point is that we even had the proper time and we don't to even launch into the gut microbiome supplementation there needs to be ultra specific you wouldn't be best served to just jump in and take random things there that's it's a whole area of emerging science we know very very very little about it but there is a number of actionable things one could do there so probably something to not mess with certainly work with a qualified physician if you think you have something going on clinical or you know some actual problem there don't work with someone who's not a specialist medical doctor there but just randomly assigning a bunch of probiotics or prebiotics without intention is maybe the next forefront of human performance research but we'll have to maybe come back in a few years and dive into that in detail or perhaps you can bring somebody on as an expert in that to discuss that yeah got microbiome is fascinating I think of sleep as the most powerful performance enhancing activity of course you still have to do the activity yeah I consider it foundational it basically raises the tide on mental health physical health performance of all kinds there's recent data that during sleep your body goes through all its various forms of metabolism possible yeah which is amazing so it's measured from breath in human subjects at breath metabolites in human subjects so obviously if one is thinking about supplementation and wondering okay what's what's the best supplement to enhance performance you gave some great rationale for why creatine would be an excellent choice provided you're eating well and hydrating well and then to my mind the next thing on the list would be anything that allows you to improve the quality and maybe even the duration of your sleep although if you wake up and you feel rested throughout the day and only need a short nap in the afternoon not everyone needs one but then generally that means you're feeling okay people sometimes get flipped on to this idea that they have insomnia insomnia is excessive daytime sleepiness where you're falling asleep during the day that's insomnia could also be narcolepsy but that's insomnia but supplementation to improve the quality or duration of sleep or both seems to me like the most direct route even though actually technically it's an indirect route to to performance enhancement and then thinking about things that increase alertness and stimulants and fatigue and fatigue reducers do you think that's a good logic yeah we go to absurd lengths to dial sleep in as much as we can I mean the honest answer is like truly absurd this is conflict adventurous that might my company I'm a part of this absolute rest is anyway that company we actually go out to your house and run a full clinical grade sleep study in you your bedroom on you run that over multiple nights so instead of having to go to sleep clinic and have it done in this weird hospital room or sort of setting with these people looking at you through a mirror it's like totally creepy that is important because that's the only way to truly determine how you are sleeping now that said the technology of wearable trackers is getting better in fact I would actually predict those things will reach a level of accuracy equivalent to the PSG in the next couple of years and probably we'll get FDA approval to be able to diagnose officially sleep disorders that's my total my prediction from some inside of formation I don't know that to be true but it is getting in the way that I'm going to sleep be true but it is getting a lot better right now those wearables are not accurate enough to meet that threshold so the we do is we bring up basically all the equipment to do that so we'll come in and do that now once we understand exactly how you're sleeping the next question is to answer why are you sleeping that way and so this is a full four fold system number one is wrong to look at biology which is going to take saliva and blood and we're looking at everything from neuro transmitter concentrations to vitamins be six be 12 etc. that are important for sleep performance so we're going to see is that is it a physiological problem is there something happen there is cortisol DHA ratio that we've previously talked about or is something like that off if it's not physiology then we're going on the next one which is environmental we want a full environmental scan of your bedroom during those nights of sleep that were there and that's really important because we can look at everything from dander and pollen and allergens that are in the air a quick tip here is wash your sheets at least once a week one of the common most common places that people get allergens in the air is actually from accumulation on your sheets so if you clean those more often you'll be in a better spot next one the next one there also is like keep your I'm sorry this hurts my heart I don't even I'm in truthfulness I violate this but keep your pets out of your bedroom and certainly keep them off your bed our our ghost face killer is my dog and no keys my other one they don't go on my bed but they're right next my bed so we violate that one but full environmental scan includes all those things of course there is we measure light and temperature and humidity and everything else is going on in the room the little organics that are coming out of the mattress from out the high lead out of the wall like all these things that could potentially disrupt your sleep and we want to make sure that none of those things are kicking on we see this constantly people have things like trying to be cool and they want to be cold at night because that's important and so they'll turn air conditioner on or a fan but they air conditioner kicking on and off at night and actually can chew chew out of various soup stages so you want to be really careful that is going the last metric on that is actually CO2 and so what you remember from our metabolism discussion is when you exhale your breathing out CO2 well if your room is closed in the ventilation isn't great the amount of CO2 in your room starts to build up and we actually very specifically know the threshold based on information collected from the international space station actually we know the threshold at which CO2 crosses and starts it disrupting sleep so we want to make sure that you're not sitting in the CO2 bath in front of your face and then breathing it back in and disrupting your sleep. So environment is the second one. The third one is actually now psychology. So one of the members on our team is a Harvard MD in psychiatry and put together an entire sleep scan survey. So we run through all that to see if there's anxiety, depression, anything like that, psychologically going on. And then the fourth one there is if you have some sort of actual sleep pathology. And so this again will include some eye tracking stuff that we can use. So we take all those data, they go back to our team. We work in combination with Steve Lockey from Harvard who's done a ton of stuff. He actually set up a lot of the circadian rhythm stuff in the national space station as well. He himself Jeffrey drummer and MD PhD, etc. And all these folks in a room go over your data, identify what's going on and build action plans off of that occasionally those action plans will include supplementation, but only if necessary. We're really going to try to come back and work through a system to improve the sleep however is needed. I realize that is not totally accessible for a lot of people, but like if you really need to go to the end of the earth to figure out sleep, that service is available. Absolutely. Rest sounds like an amazing tool given that most people won't be able to use it or access it, although we will provide a linking case people are interested in it and do want to try it. You mentioned a few things that I think everyone should assay their sleeping environment for and determine whether or not they are hindering their sleep without realizing it. For instance, the air conditioning going on and off or this could be heater going on and off or central heating or cooling unit. This could be keeping the room dark. This could be cleaning your sheets. Certainly that doesn't require that one sign up for absolute rest. So cleaning one sheets routinely, keeping pets out of the bedroom as you admitted you don't entirely. Different opinions about that, but if you're having sleep issues, the dander from animals may be part of those issues. Then one that I'll just add, which I think is pretty interesting, is there's some beautiful data out of Michael Turman's lab at Columbia Medical School in New York on negative ionization. This sounds pretty wacky. He's kind of new age. I'm sure some of you are like negative ionization, but listen, the Turman lab is a serious laboratory focused on circadian biology for many decades now. Negative ion concentrations are higher near coastal locations. So if you've ever gone to the sea or gone on vacation and you sleep better near a body of water, that's actually a real thing. There are negative ionization machines, but there are also some things that one can do in order to increase the negative ion concentration in their sleeping environment that are nearly zero cost, if not zero cost. You can look those up online and we probably will do an entire episode about this in the future. But I think what you describe for absolute rest really highlights a more general set of themes that I think are really important, which is your sleep environment is an environment. It's got a lot going on in it and it's worth running through the checklist that you described and asking where things may be not optimized, but where am I really getting in my own way in terms of sleep? All of this again being related to the fact that getting excellent sleep consistently will completely transform everything that you do and not getting excellent sleep consistently, which is a challenge for so, so many people will also transform everything that you do and think and feel, but in the negative direction. I can also offer a few tips on sleep based on things we find most consistently for those that can't go through the whole protocol. One quick little actually app called Time Shifter is really cool for anyone that's dealing with consistent travel and jet lag. So you can go and enter your location, your time where you're going, the location, and then it'll actually back calculate and it'll give you full light, stimulant, food, hydration, and stuff protocol and you just follow along with that and we've used that for many years actually, especially when traveling like Abu Dhabi for Vice and Mongolia and Brazil for the Olympics and sort of all over the place. That's, I think that app is still available, I hope so. It's great, a nice tool. A couple of things we found major. If you're dealing with acid reflex, so if you're someone who has problems like that, you can just elevate the head of your bed by like six inches. So if you put little piece of wood or something underneath it, you can also buy very inexpensive pillows that can elevate that. Now that's not solving the problem, but at least it can help you sleep whether it's just that night or if it's a consistent problem you can do there. If you're snoring, like I said, that's not really benign, you should probably take a look at that. Your first step there is mouth tape. If that doesn't work, you can go through what's called myofunctional therapy, which I don't know if you've covered that before, but it's basically tongue exercises and that can be quite effective specifically for people who have problems with REM sleep. So myofunctional therapy, it's just a, it's kind of like you do like depending on the protocol, some tongue exercises kind of the morning afternoon or night and that takes a while to be honest, you're probably going to need at least six weeks before you start saying anything, but that actually is pretty well demonstrated to help with sleep. So you can probably Google, we could find a link for for exact protocols. I don't want to describe all them, but yeah, you're going to strengthen your tongue so that it stops falling in the back of your neck and waking you up at night. So that's a really free, easy free protocol to use. If you're struggling with, it could be insomnia, but it could be just things like when you get into bed, you're super tired, you can't fall asleep or things like that. Kind of a basic rule of thumbly use is only two things happen in your bed. And if you can make sure those are the only two things you do in your bed, the problems of falling sleep are insomnia tend to go down. Those two things are you have sex and you sleep and nothing else goes down in your bed. And so you can make that environment very special and that can help quite effectively improve your ability to fall asleep and then not wake up early. So keeping that environment specific to what it's for can be effective. The only other thing I would think of is, and I hate to say this because it's not super practical, but it's just quite clear at this point, sleeping with a partner in your bed. It's just not very good for sleep. So good luck with that one. I know. You can do a couple of things if it helps. You can get two smaller beds and put them right next to each other. You can actually have separate sheets. That alone can be helpful. So if you get, you know, if you're on a king size bed or something, and I know some people, they're just like, there's no chance. But if you want to know the cost for your like the effect of your relationship, lose your loved one. I do. Please don't, please don't. Oh my goodness. So the only last thing I want to mention here is something that's popped up just a few times recently, but you're going to see more of, which is called orthosomnia. So that is a term that is people are growing concerned over, which is wearables and sleep trackers causing sleep issues. So people basically become too obsessed with optimizing, maximizing scores and that alone. Well, actually, it's actually, you, so you learn when to wake up. And so you have actually an anticipatory response when many hours prior to waking up. So if you actually learn to have a little bit of a, what's that little molecule of like excitement and reward? Oh, dopamine. That's the one. If you start getting that because you wake up and you get super excited to check your score or your phone, it's the same thing if you check your phone or Twitter, whatever in the morning, that'll actually start carving back your wake up time because you start launching it. So it can ruin sleep becoming too obsessed. So what I'll say is if you're going to use a sleep tracker and you just like, don't care. You want to check it and you have fun with it. But if you're like, you are really, really, really interested in it and you pay a lot of attention to it, don't check your sleep score for at least the first 60 minutes after waking up. And then you know, that should help you. That's a great tool. I think they'll, um, and piece of advice, I think generally because I think a lot of people are waking up in the middle of the night, checking their phone two or three times per night. I'm kind of wondering why they're doing that. And I'm guessing it's this anticipatory wake up circuit. Yeah, you absolutely should use either your night mode or do not disturb or airplane mode or something overnight. Or leave it out of the room. Yeah. I mean, if you have to wake up and like some people have, um, like a family member who's maybe not in great health, and so they have to get their phone around and keep they call or things like that. So I get it. You're like, I can't leave it out. Leave it in there. Leave it in. Do not disturb and enter in their phone number or whoever's phone number. So only they can get through but keep it black and white. So if you do have to look at your phone at night, you see black and white and you do not have notifications. So make sure that there's no notification for no email and a new DM like get all that stuff off your screen. And so you look at the, did anybody call? Did anybody text of importance? What time is it? No emergency going on black and white. Okay. Right back to sleep. So that can help a little bit. One of the supplements that I found is extremely useful for being able to fall back asleep if I've woken up in the middle of the night and for some reason can't. And is also very effective for enhancing sleep when one is ingesting fewer carbohydrates and issue that a lot of people run into or for people that are fasting for many hours before sleep, you know, people are trying to not eat anything within two to four hours but is in Nostatol, 900 milligrams of my myo and Nostatol. I find again, this is anic data to be clear that if I wake up in the middle of the night and I've taken 900 milligrams of Nostatol before initially falling asleep, that I fall back asleep much more easily. So that's why I've added 900 milligrams of Nostatol to my so-called sleep stack. I've also tried just taking it alone and it works well alone but it works better of course with the Mag 3 and 8, Apigen and theinean sleep stack. The also in terms of tools for sleep, the app, Revery, that was developed by my colleague Dr. David Spiegel who is a medical doctor at Stanford Psychiatry, Stanford School of Medicine Psychiatry. There is a free trial. There's a nominal cost if you use it month to month but the data are really strong that people that use that, I think it's 8 to 11 minutes sleep hypnosis once a week and it doesn't have to be in the middle of the night when you wake up. Really helps improve people's ability to fall asleep quickly, stay asleep, fall back asleep if they wake up in the middle of the night. In some cases, curing insomnia, in other cases, really just helping people with their general sleep issues. And I mention this because obviously the technology is not a supplement but I know that some people are supplement averse. Also if you look at the cost comparison between taking the sleep stack and the Revery app, it's pennies on the dollar really. So again, I'm a proponent of both for myself but I realize that people have varying budgets and again, I should say as always, behavioral tools first and I think of the Revery app as a more or less a behavioral tool. Yeah, it's really just a tool, any of these breathwork protocols, hypnosis protocols, they're just a tool for you to touch back in with your own physiology rather than a substance that's coming in. So I fully support those. We have used a number of those in protocols. There's some other tricks that we can pull in those areas. I probably shouldn't say this but the reality is depending on what's keeping you up, sometimes we recommend just getting up and getting it done. Like if it's a really like if it's a project or a thing or whatever, like sometimes it rather than laying there all night not sleeping, you can get up, get it done. And then if you stay awake, fine, at least the anxiety's gone. Or sometimes you can actually go back to sleep because you're like, especially if the task only literally would take like 10 or 15 minutes. It may ruin your sleep but you're going to have a room to sleep anyways. So you can try that tool. You don't want to pull that card very often and you have to be very careful with what you consider to be something worthy of doing that. But that is like between me and you and nobody else here. That's a tool I have used personally more than a few times or it's just like, I get an idea and I don't lose it or like the solution for something you've been doing on for a long time pops in your head and just like, and you're not wanting to forget it. Just get up and get it done and get on with your day. In several previous episodes, you emphasized how exercise induces various adaptations depending on the types of a city volume intensity, et cetera, of the exercise. And that during exercise, the degree of adaptation that one triggers is often associated with things that normally we don't associate with exercise related health. Things like huge increases in blood pressure during exercise, huge increases in inflammatory markers, muscle damage. Things all sound terrible. But as you beautifully explained, all of that triggers adaptations that then bring those markers below the baseline with which they were previous to the exercise. So that's the adaptation and the recovery. Within the realm of supplementation and nutrition, I'm aware of a number of things, some herbal, some lipid based other compounds that are used for various things but that are known to have a potent anti-inflammatory effect. Things like omega-3 fatty acids, ashwagandha for its effect on cortisol, although that's a bit indirect to the inflammatory pathway, curcumin and things of that sort. Given that we want inflammation in order to trigger the adaptation response to exercise, and given that we want to reduce inflammation in the recovery period, can we put together a logical framework as to when is best to take anything anti-inflammatory, whether it's supplement-based or prescription or over-the-counter drug and when to strictly avoid taking any anti-inflammatory supplement or behavioral tool. You mentioned ice can reduce inflammation. That's why you don't want to do it too close to exercise. Anyway, I think you get the gist of the question. What about specific supplements related to inflammation and anti-inflammatory responses? What are the best ones? When should we take them? When should we avoid taking them? The way that I think about it is understanding what we call the fitness fatigue model. What I mean by that is whenever you do some sort of insult, the whole idea is for you to come back and get an adaptation. Now recovery is not adaptation. Recovery is recovery. Adaptation is what happens after you're recovered. It's a very important distinction there. Fitness fatigue model says, basically, you've done something and you've got an adaptation and you've enhanced fitness. By fitness, in this case, I mean it as a non-specific term. You've got stronger, you've improved your endurance, whatever thing you're trying to train for. At the same time, though, your fatigue elevated. What happens is if fitness increases at the same or similar rate as fatigue, your performance actually isn't any better. You may think, oh, my program isn't working. I need to then train harder or I need to take more anti-inflammatory or whatever the things are. In reality, all you really need to do is reduce fatigue. If you do that, your performance will increase and all the training adaptations will be actualized. The way that we do that is a couple of things. First and foremost is actually a taper. The first step I think of if someone is training very, very hard and you're not seeing any results and we want to think about supplementation. Before I get there, I want to think about taper and de-load. If you're actually training hard and sleep and everything else is taking care of. Without going too far into taper, some general parameters there. You want to think about about a 50% reduction in training volume over the course of about a week for every eight weeks of training. Super, super rough, right? If you've been training hard for three months or something, you might want a taper for two weeks, something like that. It's sort of a rough estimate. That taper, you actually don't need to reduce intensity because intensity is not the driver fatigue. It tends to be volume. As long as your volume is reduced by 50%, you can maintain intensity. You can maintain, in fact, I generally would recommend maintaining frequency. If you used to work out four days a week, keep it four days a week, you can go down a little bit in frequency. If you go down too much in frequency, you actually tend to feel super lethargic. I wouldn't do that. If you do those things correctly, you can typically see somewhere between a 3 to 8% improvement or performance within a matter of days. It's important to do that. We actually ran a study on cross-country runners years ago, testing on a metabolic heart, muscle biopsies, blood, a whole bunch of things, and we did it pre and post three weeks of taper. This is cool because we did this in competitive season. It was a collegiate cross-country runners. We got them to come to our lab, three weeks before their conference championship, ran them all through a bunch of testing, biopsied them. They went through their three week taper and then we biopsied them again and then they went and ran their conference championships. What happened was they ended up hitting about a 50% reduction because what they did is they took out what we call the junk volume. They kept their race tempost high intensity stuff in there. They kept their recovery stuff and then that medium pace they just basically reduced. They were terrified as any endurance runner or endurance athlete or participant would understand when you take volume away, they tend to get very nervous. They didn't like that. As a result of that, what we saw is their VO2 max, despite the fact that they covered half the mileage, their VO2 max did not go down in three weeks of reduced taper. Your fitness is extremely stable. In fact, once we actually looked at their data, the enzymes in their muscle were responsible for oxidative metabolism were maintained. You don't have to worry about losing fitness, whether we're talking about overall performance or even oxygen capacity, mitochondrial function, etc. That was all preserved. Obviously, we saw performance go up. What was actually really interesting is we saw, I think it was around a 10% increase in type 2, which are fast twitch muscle fiber size. So we saw a 10% increase in fast twitch fiber size at the end of three weeks of tapering. Now what you may think is like, wow, I guess tapering is anabolic, but that's probably not what happened. What realistically probably happened was their volume of training was actually causing their fibers to be reduced in size. And then once we removed that fatigue, they just recovered back to normal. So that's a good example of what I'm talking about. Once you remove the fatigue, you can actually see enhanced and perform. It's not because you're necessarily getting better, but because you're removing the stimuli that's suppressing you. So that being said, the way that you want to think about recovery like this is although recovery, especially like injury recovery, like seems chaotic, biology is very organized. And there's a very specific three step process that you're going to go through for recovery. And then there are different supplements that can help you in each of those three areas. So area one is basically inflammation. So this is when the side of Kymestorm comes rolling out, it starts signaling the injuries there. In this case, even if it's muscle damage, it activates immune system to kick on and that whole repair process happens there. What you're trying to do effectively, in fact, this is why you probably ever wonder like, why is inflammation a thing? What you're trying to do is bring in fluid, enhance the size and increase blood flow in so that you can get nutrients for repair and immune cells and then like that, in the system and get the waste out. So short term inflammation, even in the case of muscle soreness is the example we talked about in the previous episode. But any inflammation, it is part of the necessary process. That's why you would not want to take an anti-inflammatory in that state. And so why you also would not want to do things like an ice bath. So in that immediate inflammatory response time window, this is seconds to hours after training, you would want to stay away from things like that. A good option here are things like omega-3s. Good evidence, somewhere in the neighborhood of like two to five grams total, typically like a one-to-one EPA to DHA ratio is fine. Similarly, this is another example of when good doesn't mean more is better. Because for example, there is actually evidence showing up to 15 grams will harm the immune response. And so you don't just want to be like, man, I'm super sore, I'm training harder, I'm just going to go to 10 grams a year more and more, you're actually causing yourself more of a problem. So anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatories are fine. Again, omega-3s in that dosage are a decent thing. You can also do something like 500 milligrams of curcumin three times a day. That's going to be enough to keep you in a decent spot. There are some other things that you could look up, maybe some potential benefit for ginger and bicepilia and some things like that for inflammation. But under, unless we're in like very specific circumstances where we have like an injury, we're probably not going to those areas. I just wanted to highlight one thing that came up in the previous episode. Some not all people, but some, including myself, are very sensitive to curcumin. It has a very potent effect in reducing DHT, dehydrate testosterone and leads to all sorts of clamping of testosterone associated positive things. So I have experienced that myself. I've had people write to me and say, I don't understand. I started taking a supplement. Curcumin is supposed to be a great anti-inflammatory. It flatlined my libido. It took away my drive and kind of wondering what's going on there. Those people are very likely to be very DHT sensitive. Curcumin, while it's a potent anti-inflammatory, can also put and leave reduced DHT. But some people tolerate it quite well and are hearing this and probably think that's ridiculous. Well, it's certainly substantiated by the chemical pathways that curcumin taps into in the known roles of DHT on libido, aggression, power output, etc. And mood. So just be wary that, A, there's no way to predict this. One simply has to figure it out empirically. Meaning you have to try and see if you like it or don't. The good news is, is those negative effects on DHT seem to reverse pretty quickly after ceasing to take curcumin. So just a mention of something that came up in a previous episode, but in case people didn't hear that segment, just wanted to highlight those facts. Further evidence? Do I strongly discourage? Strongly discourage shaking anything in the anti-inflammatory antioxidant realm, unless you actually have a reason to do so. If you're waking up and you're like, maybe I'm inflamed, that's probably not a good approach. Let's have a reason to do so. Step two is actually what we call proliferation. And that's kind of like the cleanup crew. That's when you're going to be going in there and cleaning out dead cells and debris and mistreated proteins and things like that. At this stage, a fantastic evidence-based supplement is glutamine. Glutamine 20 grams a day. We typically honestly split it up into two dosage, 10 grams morning, 10 grams night. It's a conditional amino acid, which means you can make it, your body can make enough of it at times and other times you may want to support it. Generally, those conditional times are things like burn victims, high stress situations or injury, things like that. So there isn't also like a ton of downside to glutamine because it can go through transamination, which means your body can take it and say like, we don't need anything here for our muscle recovery. So we can make it into something else and use it for whatever else is needing. So it's kind of another one of these low risk products. It's also why you see it in a lot of recovery products. If you're ever wondering what the heck is that in there. I don't need amino acids and you're thinking it's for protein synthesis. It's really not. It's because of this beneficial to this proliferation process. I've been taking glutamine for years. I tend to take it in higher dosages several times throughout the day if I'm ever feeling particularly run down. I know there are decent data, not great, but decent data on the role of glutamine for leaky gut. Totally. We're off saying leaky gut. That's getting a little bit into the realm of like not super well substantiated, but in the peer reviewed literature, but some a lot of anachdata and certainly some peer reviewed work, but not a ton. And then there is also growing interest in the idea that glutamine, because it can trigger activation of the neurons in the gut that signal to the dopamine pathway in the brain, that it can be used to offset sugar cravings. This is kind of an interesting new and emerging theme, which makes sense given the biology of the neurons in the gut that respond to specific amino acids, including glutamine, essential fatty acids, and sugar. And because they respond to any and all three of those, any one or combination of those, I should say, to trigger this dopamine response. Some people have taken to a teaspoon or so of glutamine in some water or other drink a couple of times throughout the day as a way to reduce their sugar cravings because what's essentially doing is it's tricking the pathway into activation of those neurons through an alternate ligand receptor interaction. Right. Also, another interesting point, there are very, I'm trying to think right now, it's out in my head. I can't think of a time, and I've used glutamine a lot. I can't think of a time where I've ever heard anybody come back with any side effect reports. I think if you take enough of it, you can get some gastric distress. But of course, you take enough of any powder and substance, mixed in water, you're going to get a gastric distress response. What I've noticed about gastric distress with things like creatine, glutamine, and even protein powder, so that matter, I use a high quality way protein powder routinely, is you build up to it over the course of a few days, then you can get away with using much higher dosages without any issue. Yeah, yeah. Beta Allonene is the same thing, by the way. We talked about that earlier. If you've ever tried that, you're like, oh my gosh, I feel like I've just rolled around and grasped and my skin is itching everywhere. Oh, exactly. And some of the skin sensation. Yeah, all that stuff. You can just take a little bit of a lower dosage and be fine for the most part. And then you will build up a tolerance to that pretty quickly, so you can up that dosage along the way. So what we will oftentimes do there, start at a dosage that's pretty minimal like two grams. And then every week or so, you can go up another gram until you get to whatever final point you want to be five, six grams day, whatever. So that's another way you can sort of mitigate that problem. So the third step in this recovery process, after inflammation, proliferation, we're now into remodeling. This is when you're actually, quote unquote, growing back bigger and stronger. This is where the majority of the repairs are actually taking place. And at this point, we're basically playing a micronutrient and macronutrient game. By that, I mean, we've talked about basic macronutrients, one thing to pay attention to. Oftentimes if people are hurt, whether they had an injury, or they've had just their super sore, and they are concerned about eating excess calories, they tend to want to eat less food during this process, because they're like, I'm not working out so much. So I'm going to eat less calories. Well, one of the things that you have to pay attention to is injury can increase space and metabolic rate by up to 10%. So what you want to do in general is just take your calories up about 10%. At least that's what I recommend. If that is an extended period of time, then yes, you may put on a slight amount of body fat or something. But if that also means you come back some percentage faster, then it's worth the exchange. So we recommend that. In terms of your carbohydrate or fat split, I'm not super worried about it. My general recommendation is just don't make any major changes relative to what you were doing. Keep yourself pretty much in the same spot. In terms of protein, this is the big one. You want to make sure you're absolutely at one gram per pound in body weight, because we need those amino acids to come in and start helping with recovery. One gram of protein per pound in body weight, or more, or one gram. Or more, yeah, it's going to be very little downside to having more. Remember protein and carbohydrates, both stimulate insulin. And remember insulin is anabolic. And so we're trying to drive this process of recovery. That's why you want both. So you wouldn't want to skimp on carbohydrates in this phase, nor would you want to skimp on protein because you need the activation, the drive into the tissue, as well as the structure. Going back to one of our earlier conversations, and at this point in the week, I honestly can't remember at all what episode we covered this in, but I gave it an analogy about making a campfire and using fat and carbohydrates as the wood and the log and the protein were the metal structure. So you need that supply. If you're trying to bang, if you've cleared out in the previous step, damaged proteins and you need to make new ones to recover that process, you have to have the raw supply and material. And I want to avoid either one of those things. There's actually some indirect inflammation management that comes from fatty acids, which you actually sort of alluded to earlier. I don't think you need to necessarily go crazy. You don't need to change your fat intake that much. Just don't drop it, depending on where you're at. So if you're a little bit of a higher carb, lower fat person, great. If you're moderate, great. If you're the indirect, if you're higher fat, lower carb person, awesome. Just don't make an extreme change and try to not be only extremes of either one of those ratios. The only specific number to pay attention to again is that protein number. And if you go a little bit high or even a lot high, it's totally fine. Just don't go low. So that's the macronutrient portion of remodeling. In terms of micronutrients, to be honest, you just get your bases covered. This is one of a basic multivitamin. It is effective. What you're really trying to look at here are vitamin A and zinc. They actually have independent mechanisms that are helpful here. But those are typically covered in most multivitamins. We generally just give people a multivitamin. Magnesium has some benefits here. Something like six milligrams per kilogram of body weight is the dosage you're looking for there. Magnesium citrate is probably has the most evidence in terms of this respect. But it doesn't mean I actually have no reason to think you couldn't use glycinate or if you're using another form for sleep, that's probably fine. I don't know that for sure. But I can't think of a reason why the other forms of magnesium would all of a sudden not work. So you could probably choose whichever form you like. Obvious citrate has probably the most research in this aspect. The only other things you would probably consider here are three things. Calcium might be on your list, particularly if you're trying to, if you're concerned with some sort of bone injury, and we've sort of gone past like recovering, we're actually like into injury. So you'll see that in recovery products occasionally, and that's why. And then the last two ones, of course, are vitamin D, and that's pretty well researched. And then the last one is actually something that can help you if you're at this stage, and you still are dealing with a lot of soreness or not, and that is tart cherry juice. That's actually effective for both doms, muscle injury, muscle soreness, and it actually has another benefit of potentially eating with sleep. So I'm not a bad one to turn to as well. And there's a number of companies that make these things. Yeah, and then there's actually more ongoing research that I know of on those areas, but not promising literature, we'll say. Not often, but every once in a while on this podcast, I will solicit social media for questions from the audience, where I should say the audience to be, and then ask some of those questions on the fly during the podcast. I do this with Dr. Lex Friedman. I'm going to do it with you. Your goal is to answer each of these questions, certainly not all of them, thousands of them within the last couple of hours, to answer each of these questions in three or four sentences. I certainly won't be counting the number of sentences that you speak. So just know that if you want to go over a little bit, that's fine. But feel free to refer to your Instagram site at a future time where you might go more in depth or to refer to a study, or if you like, you can also say pass if you don't think that you can answer the question, you know, succinctly enough for this format. And here the goal is not to put you on the spot. The goal is simply to allow the audience to ask some questions directly. And I confess I'm looking at these for the first time. So I'll try and be quick with my reading. Some of these we may have touched on in previous episodes or in this episode, even in which case you can just kind of cue us to the reminder. This is not directly related to supplementation, but it is related to nutrition. And I don't think we touched on this directly. Can we do intermittent fasting, aka time restricted feeding with keto and still gain muscle mass? TBD. I am quite clear such study does not exist. So I don't know. I think I've alluded to before that we did run an intermittent fasting 16, eight hypertrophy study. There was no keto arm. The result of that study by the time this comes out, we'll probably be ready. I'm not sure. So I can't comment on I haven't looked at the data. But regarding whether or not I've heated that with keto or not, I can't comment scientifically. Do you ever prescribe the use of GABA supplements? Well, I can't prescribe anything to make sure we're clear. But your professor, you can profess. I can. I can. We generally don't spend too much time on GABA rarely. Is it okay to wait train faster than not break the fast and eat for three or four hours after training? So in other words, train fasted. I do this. But then also not eat immediately following training and wait another three to four hours after training. Once we have our results from intermittent fasting study back, we will have a better answer here. My general recommendation, as it stands now though, is as long as your total protein intake is sufficient. You should be in a decent spot. Great. A lot of questions about fasting and training just to turn with that. Can you train high performance fasted and how long before you need to refuel the body? Yeah, you can certainly do that. I know of actually many athletes. Some athletes will do that though the vast majority will not. As it gets higher and higher in intensity and or duration, it gets more challenging. But it really does come down to what you did the day before as well. So if you ate sufficient calories a day before, didn't train and your glycogen stores are topped off, you have a fighting chance. Now the duration part of that equation is really dependent upon you. So are you really talking 30, 45 minutes, 16 minutes? You're probably fine. Whether you're out past that in several hours, you may not be. And then the only other comment I would make is there is keep in mind, whenever you think about fasting and any other, let's say against the textbook, quote unquote, strut style, you really, really need to be careful in thinking the difference between, can I do it and is it optimal? So I have absolutely no reason to think fasting like that would improve performance. I only work for the most part with people who are trying to perform the highest level possible. So I can't think of a scenario which I would go too fasting to try to enhance performance. So whether or not you can maintain some level of performance, probably will it provide any benefit? I struggle to find scenarios in which that would actually make you perform better. How do different forms of carbohydrates impact performance? And then right below it, another question about carbohydrates, which is does carbohydrate cycling work? So these are two questions from people that I think don't know one another, but a lot of questions about carbohydrates and performance, which we've touched on, anything else that you want to add to that conversation? I don't think I really maybe you might want to think about carb loading slash carbs cycling. So carbohydrate loading does help. However, a misconception there is it's just a big bowl of pasta the night before. That can help top off storages, but really optimal carbohydrate loading prior to a long duration endurance performance is probably best over the course of three or four days. You want to gradually increase carbohydrate intake for multiple days, rather than just have one big bowl of pasta. Branch chain amino acids and essential amino acids supplementation, yay, nay or as I would say, meh. Meh usually if your total protein intake is fine, then you don't really have a need for them. If you're for whatever any number of valid reasons, total protein is not then going to essentially amino acid would be my first step rather than a BCAA. Now admittedly, we actually do use essential amino acids somewhat regularly because it's also sort of like a there's no real harm other than if you're price conscious and you're sort of like I'm wasting money. That's fine. The people I work with generally again, that's not a few dollars for the maximize recoveries is not that great. So we will sometimes use that pre-mitter post training in some circumstances, total protein would be a high quality way, something like that. If you can't use way for whatever reasons, there are plenty of high quality vegan proteins you could use. If you want to top all that off though and add some essential amino acids, it wouldn't hurt anything and may potentially help slightly. So you choose based on that algorithm. Ah, I was hoping somebody would ask this. I touched on it a little bit. It's a little bit of a loaded question the way they phrased it. So at risk of leading the witness, does the mythical anabolic window really exist? And I'm just laughing because of the way they pose the question they're already telling us what their stance is, making it more effective to create hypertrophy, to eat within a certain time frame after working out. I'm going to assume that this person genuinely wants to know whether or not the anabolic window really exists or not because they refer to it as mythical. I'm going to assume that they're suspicious, but what's the deal is the anabolic window, a real thing? The post-exercise anabolic window is extremely real. So what this is, you can see more detail in a number of videos on my YouTube page, I believe. It is the idea that you need to must consume some sort of nutrients, specifically, usually protein in some time domain, 30 or 60 minutes post-exercise in order to maximize growth. So is that window real? Yes. Are you hyper sensitized to nutrients in that time frame? Yes. Is it very important that you rehydrate, replenish muscle glycogen, and rebuild tissue quickly after exercise to maximize recovery? Absolutely. It's not real though in the sense that you have to have it within 30 minutes. In the case of protein, as we talked about a second ago, your total protein intake throughout the day is more important. Timing though for things like carbohydrate, especially if you're training multiple times a day, it is very real. So it is a very real thing. It's just you may or may not actually care about it. It may not be important for your context. Garlic seems like an appropriate question. What if any functional roles does garlic have in performance? Garlic's actually really cool. There's a number of things you can dive into that are outside of my three to four sentences considering I'm at like two and a half probably already. You're not going to find strong human data on garlic extract. However, there is a little bit suggesting it can actually enhance recovery from injury or potentially tissue damage. So you've got to kind of be careful though because in order to understand what's happening, you have to differentiate between an ate and adaptive recovery processes. And when we say things like immunity, realized fence, that's not one thing. That's just like a very colloquial term for a number of things. Again, it's a verb. It's a noun, right? The immune system, but immunity is a bunch of processes or processes. If you're about to correct my speech, I'll correct yours right back. Not yours, Andy. Listeners, process, tomato tomato. It's a verb. Immunity is a verb. This is my problem with immune boosters. Same issue, right? You're like, whoa, what are you boosting specifically? Because in fact, if you're boosting the wrong part of immunity during the wrong phase of recovery with garlic, you may be actually hurting the process because you're theoretically could be trying to downregulate that portion that you can upregulate an exportion. That's the faster way to say it, if you will. So, we actually, you may see more data come out that says the garlic extracts overrated. I don't know. I actually don't even know yet. We just don't have enough human data on it. But yeah, there's some stuff there if you want to look hard enough. I'm going to ask this question for myself because I'm curious to know the answer. Selfish. Tarte cherry extract. Pretty effective, actually. For two things, potentially hating and sleep, getting sleep as well as muscle soreness. That's the bulk of the research is in muscle soreness and seems to be a moderate effect there. I think for people that might be interested in dosages of things like tart cherry extract, garlic, etc. Obviously, Dr. Andy Galpins, Instagram and Twitter are great places to ask questions like that and define questions, answers to questions like that as well as examine.com as a terrific website. They actually recently overhauled their entire website so they have this human effect matrix that shows the effects and the strength of different effects in human studies of many, many different compounds relating to everything to hormone health and men and women, sports performance, cognitive performance. It doesn't cover everything but it certainly covers a lot with links to studies. There's a lot that's available at completely zero cost by joining examine.com. You can access some additional features and this is by the way not a paid endorsement from examine.com. I'm simply a long time user of examine.com myself and so I just want to cue people to it. Again, many of the resources there are available completely free of cost. It's a wonderful site. For dostages of garlic, tart cherry extract and things of that sort, whether or not you're getting it from food or you're getting it from powders rather, all of that information is pretty nicely laid out there. Unless you have something to add to that, I was just going to cue people to that resource. No, I've been using that since the first day that website was launched. I was made aware that it was coming. Unfortunately, I know those guys for a while. So I've used it, I've used it in all my classes. I don't even know, probably weekly at this point. Another nice feature that's actually on there is they have a series of, they'll do some topical reviews basically. They'll write a big paper out on muscle damage or blood pressure or testosterone, testosterone, enhancement or hormone menstrual cycle and... Yeah, PCOS, I think they do one on and all kinds of stuff. You can search by topic, like energy or recovery or whatever, or you can search by black human CDX tractor, like whatever number of things you want to do. I'll also tell you if there's any interactions to pay attention to. So it's really, really nice. So be careful, if you're taking A, N, B or whatever. So yeah, it's wonderful, wonderful. Yeah, they've done a marvelous job. So thank you, examine.com, keep up the amazing work. Well, we've come close to the end of this episode and that means that we're close to the end of this series where you have so graciously joined us for six full episodes of the Hubert Man Lab podcast to educate us on all things fitness. Episode one, you reviewed and educated us on assessing our level of fitness. In fact, I learned so many ways of assessing fitness that I had not thought about and also assessing my recovery capacity, for instance. One thing that I'm definitely going to implement from that episode is a routine broad jump test and an in-home high jump jump in touch test. If people don't know what I'm referring to, it's all contained in that episode. It's time stamped. These are very straightforward, zero cost ways to assess one's level of fitness. There are a few others that require a bare minimum of technology like taking your pulse rate in very specific ways, specific times. Also some timing of mile runs and some other things relate to strength and hypertrophy and on and on. Really it's a buffet of options that we can select from. I already know the four or five that I started implementing this week. I've recognized how I'm pretty good in a couple of areas. I'm doing maybe, maybe better than pretty well in one area, but that I'm doing a bit poorly in a few areas that I just wasn't aware of. I've already started taking on ways to adjust that over time and I'll keep people posted. That first episode was absolutely incredible. It just provides so much actionable knowledge and the rationale behind it. The second episode you educated us about strength, speed, and hypertrophy training. There too, an immense amount of incredible knowledge. We got way down into the details you explained sets, reps, the rationale for sets, reps, rest, cadence, number of workouts per week. I'm definitely going to take away my need to do some speed-based training and some power based training. Normally, I think in terms of strength and hypertrophy. I'm relieved to learn that a lot of the speed and power based training, it's low intensity enough that it can be done fairly often and incorporated into my program which already touches on strength and hypertrophy and indeed some endurance work as well. Amazing tips that you provided there. I'm certainly going to implement the 3-5 program that you described. 3-5 exercises done for 3-5 repetitions, 3-5 minutes between sets. You're doing this 3-5 times per week and so on and so forth. All the details again, timestamped in the strength and hypertrophy episode show notes. Just incredible. You even use that to set a PR with you this week. That's right. I did PR this week. Thanks to your input and following that program and I'm really grateful for that. It does feel good to break through a barrier and I intend to break through more barriers. But not just with strength and hypertrophy because episode 3, you taught us all about endurance, the four different forms of endurance, how to train for each of those different forms. The value of doing even very brief, 20-second sprints or bouts of jumping jacks throughout the day which to some people might just sound like a little hack or gimmick but no. These are actually tapping into fuel systems and modes of neuromuscular interactions that greatly aid other forms of endurance like long duration endurance. I would love to return to my high school mile time. I won't reveal what that is because this is not really about me but I plan to start doing if not mile repeats then doing some mile runs and testing there once a week. You laid out a beautiful program for how to do that and then in the next episode you wowed us again with a description of the science and the tools and this right down to the details but all laid out very cleanly and clearly as to how to design an optimal fitness program. What are the things that really represent an optimal program? What questions does one have to answer before designing a program? What are some of the barriers in the way? This concept of defenders as things that prevent you from reaching your goals and one of the key things I have it right here in front of me that I took away from that episode was this quadrant approach of really thinking about and figuring out how much one intends to devote to work career calling. Let's make that one bin relationships. Other bin fitness in the other bin and recovery in the other bin and here we'll tip our hats are good friend Kenny Kane for mentioning that overall scheme for doing things. It's been immensely useful and I've actually charted it out and thought about and drawn out which different things fall into each of these categories. You might think it's obvious okay relationships but that includes a lot of different things and there's crossover between these bins in terms of how you can combine enhancing relationships with fitness work recovery and so on. So that episode is just again a treasure trove of knowledge and then in the next episode you you educated us on recovery in all its forms in the very short term within the workout immediately after the workout and from workout to workout ways to really accelerate recovery assess recovery and as you pointed out for people like me who always assume that we don't recover very well in that some sort of character trait or nervous system thing or genetic to really think about how my training is impacting my level of recovery and in doing so is revealed to me that I have far more capacity than I thought I had and already this week I've managed to train more often doing more work and I feel better than ever and that's also despite the fact that we've spent a fair amount of time in these chairs across from one another. It's a kind of way to say it. Well it's been a pleasure and then in today's episode you explained nutrition and supplementation as it relates to performance and of course that touches into recovery but also optimal mental states for training. How to approach one's training and how to extract the most from training through quality nutrition. Right. So what to eat and when which carbohydrates protein amounts, windows of opportunity, windows you absolutely don't want to miss and then some that are a bit more flexible and then we went deep into the weeds of magnesium, garlic, tertiary extract, alpha GPC, we touched on neural transmitter related systems, hormone related systems. We went deep into a discussion about sleep because of course sleep is the foundation for recovery and performance of all kinds, emotional, mental and physical recovery and performance and in taking us through this enormous arc of a journey through fitness. I think it's fair to say that you've given us your knowledge containing your head. I was telling someone just the other day that one of the things that I always lamented in science is that I would encounter these incredible professors and scientists and in other domains of life too and you just wish there was some way to download their brain because they had so much knowledge inside them and I'm looking for a USB or USB C port on you and I don't see one yet. What you've effectively done for us across these six episodes is to download the actionable knowledge and it's wonderful. The information you've provided is clear. It's super interesting. It's highly, highly actionable and in many cases it's counterintuitive and surprising but once one understands the logic behind it as you've provided for us also then it all makes sense in a way that's extremely satisfying and extremely motivating. But certainly motivating me to change the way that I train in a number of ways and I promise that I'll report back to our audience and to you as to what my results are but really as we both agree this is not about me. This is not about you. This is really about the people listening and so for those of you listening I hope you can appreciate what an incredible gift it is to have somebody of Dr. Andy Galpins experience and drive and scholarly background who also works with athletes and everyday people just to display out all this knowledge for us systematically over six episodes. Dr. Andy Galpins thank you ever so much. I appreciate that far too kind of words to me. If you've been following along through this entire journey as you called it, you know I like first principles thinking and I like lists. So I'm going to get you with one more list and I got five things on this final list. Get your pen and pat out please. Number one, I want to really emphasize science itself is a verb which means it's ongoing and changing. I did my best over the course of these many, many, many hours to provide my interpretation of the science, to provide my practical knowledge and things that I use. But that's fallible. This changes there are many, many things in my career that I was very sure the evidence was clear on and then it changed. So as you move forward, do not think of any of the recommendations I gave you whether they were about supplement dosages and timing, rep ranges or breathing tactics, anything in between. Just use them as guidelines. So number one, science is a verb. Number two, I really want to thank the audience. This has been an extremely long haul. Some of you have somehow I'm sure, which I'm not sure how, but some of you have probably made it through this entire journey and listened to all six episodes and you should probably get some sort of free human lab shirt or something or a plaque or I don't know. How about a galvan plaque? A galvan plaque. How about an internet high five? And even if you just dropped in for a few of the episodes, I appreciate you taking the time. There's a lot of things you could be doing with your time and to make, to spend those resources on my words is touching. Number three, I want to actually thank you, of course, Andrew and the whole team and the crew up here for three things. Number one, I think it's incredibly important that you have gone out of your way to give other people credit for their work. You go out of your way and your large platforms, social media to tag people to give scientists credit for their work. Most people do not do that and that's something you don't have to do. I think that is a culture. I know why you do it. You come from science. That's just what you do. You get people credit for their work, but you go out of your way to do that. So I want to thank you for that. The next one is many people who have outlets and platforms will try to fill those with people who are going to grow their platforms. It doesn't mean these people are wrong or bad, but I think what's extremely special about what you've created here is again, you have gone out of your way to bring on the direct source of information. I can't even imagine how many of your podcasts have never been on a podcast before. Or it's been on a very short number of them. You've made an extremely large platform doing nothing but talking about super deep dork science directly from the sciences themselves and to create a community like that. I'm so happy that science is made here and you've shown the world. People aren't stupid. People want detail and people want science and you've given us them. And the last one, of course, let's see if I get through this is a thank you for what you've done for me and my career. I understand there could have been any number of people in this chair. To put me on your platform once was incredibly gracious, but to do it for 600 hours, whatever we did in this series is I can't think enough of that opportunity. So I hope I lived up to it and I had a tremendous time and thank you for being such a gracious host. Well, you more than exceeded expectations. You are absolutely the person to be in this chair talking about these topics with me and for the world. And once again, I just want to say thank you as a colleague, as a public educator, as an exercise scientist and as a friend. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple and on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for us or comments or suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover or guess you'd like me to include on the Hubertman Lab podcast, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and during today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. I'd also like to inform you about the Hubertman Lab podcast free newsletter. It's called the neural network newsletter and each month, the neural network newsletter is sent out and it contains summaries of podcast episodes, specific protocols discussed on the Hubertman Lab podcast, all in fairly concise format and all completely zero cost. You can sign up for the neural network newsletter by going to Hubertman Lab.com, go to the menu and click on newsletter. You provide us your email. We do not share it with anybody. And as I mentioned before, it's completely zero cost by going to Hubertman Lab.com. You can also go into the menu tab and go to newsletter and see some example newsletters from months past. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion about fitness, exercise and performance with Dr. Andy Galpin. And as always, thank you for your interest in science.Welcome to the Hubertman Lab guest series where I and an expert guest discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Hubertman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today's episode is the third in the sixth episode series on fitness, exercise, and performance. Today's episode is all about endurance and fat loss, that is the specific protocols required to achieve the four different kinds of endurance and how to maximize fat loss. Dr. Andy Yalpin, great to be back. Today we're going to talk about endurance and I'm very interested in this conversation because I like many other people strive to get a certain amount of cardiovascular work in each week. Maybe a long-ish jog, maybe a swim, ride the bike, etc. But when I think about the word endurance, the idea that almost immediately comes to mind is about doing something for a long period of time repeatedly. But I have a feeling that there are other ways to trigger this adaptation that we call the endurance adaptation. I'm excited to learn about that. I'm also excited to learn about the fuel systems in the body that allow for endurance and other modes of repeated activity. So in order to kick things off, I'd love for you to frame the conversation by telling us what is endurance and are there indeed a large variety of ways to induce what we call this endurance adaptation? Sure. The way I want to start actually here is calling back to some of the things we talked about in our previous conversations, which are really people exercise for three reasons. Number one, you want to feel better. Number two, you want to look a certain way. And then number three, you want to be able to do that for a long time. So you need the way that we say it, sports, it's look good, feel good, play good. So I want some sort of functionality to be able to perform a certain way, whatever that is for you. You want to be able to look a certain way that whatever that matters for you. And then you want to be able to do that for a long time. So when it comes to endurance, we have a bunch of misnomer's here, which is the same thing with the strength training of resistance exercise side, where we wanted to dispel this myth that I lift weights only because I want to gain muscle or play a sport. And I want to do cardio because I want to lead their loose fat or for long health sake. And just like we smashed that myth from the strength training side, I want to smash it from the endurance training side. There are so many other reasons that you want to perform endurance training. Regardless of your goal, right, whether it is longevity, whether it is performance or whether it is aesthetics. And so we're going to I want to cover all those reasons exactly what to do protocols, of course, and why those things are working that way. In general, though, the quick answer is really endurance comes down to two independent factors. The factor number one is fatigue management. And then factor number two is fueling. And that's all it really comes down to. So all the different types of training are going to reach a limitation, which are either again your ability to deal with some sort of fatigue. And that's generally a fatigue signal. The other one is managing some sort of restriction of energy input. And a lot of the spoiler here is a lot of the times people think it's a fueling issue and really it's a fatigue management issue or the opposite. And to have a complete health spectrum, regardless of whether you're a high performance athlete, like I typically deal with or general public, you need to be able to do both. Manage fatigue as well as understand fuel storage. So that's really what we're going to get into today. Fantastic. I can't wait. Before we dive in, I'm going to ask you what I often ask people who are expert in their respective fields, which is, is there any non obvious tool or mechanism or tool and mechanism that can allow people to access better endurance? When I think about training for endurance, again, I think about trying to run longer and longer each week or swim further and further and so on. But I do wonder whether or not there are other forms of training that can amplify the endurance adaptation that I or most people perhaps don't think of as endurance. Sure. The way I want to answer this is if we look back and think about how we've answered that question with power and strength and force production, it is really about how much can you produce. Maximally once what you're asking now is how can I repeat that same quality of performance? If that's the case endurance really comes down to your ability to maintain proper mechanics. That's going to like the biggest way we can increase your endurance exponentially very quickly is mechanical and this is starting with breathing. And so we need to be breathing properly. We need to have proper posture and positions and then we need to be moving well. Efficiency is going to trump force always for endurance. The other side of the equation is not that you can have a little bit of leaks in your mechanics and still squat well or jump high and be fine because you don't have to suffer those consequences repeatedly. That's going to drain you over time. So the quickest way to improve endurance is to improve mechanics and mechanical thing I would go after first is your breathing techniques, your pattern, your entire approach as well as your posture. And then from there the third one would be your movement technique. Is it possible to describe the best way to breathe when doing endurance training or is it far more complex than that? And if it is far more complex than that then certainly we can get into it during today's episode. Yeah, it is both of those I will give you a quick answer though a lot of the times you can kind of hit the cheat code which is nasal breathing. There's plenty of times when you don't want a nasal breath. They don't need to nasal breath. But just again is that like a one tool that is for a pretty general answer. If you can do that a lot of the times that will fix breathing mechanics just by default and we can maybe talk about why that is later but that would be my sort of one sentence pullup point answer immediately of how to get in the right position. So second one would be simply looking at your posture right so whether you're on a bike or you're doing a lift or you're running if you're literally hunched over and your ribs are touching your femur or getting closer and closer like tends to happen on a bike or an aerosol thing for somebody I've seen recently. This morning I was on the assault bike doing a sprint and I asked Andy Dr. Galpin to critique my form and anything else he wanted to critique so that I could improve and he did comment on my rather sea shaped posture. Correct. I'm encouraging me to be more upright which I should probably do now as well. And he also queued me to the fact that during a one minute sprint there is something that is going to be a little bit more complex. And I use that as a as a milestone to look for and indeed something does happen at the 42nd into a one minute sprint where all of a sudden it does seem to get much easier for reasons I don't understand maybe you can tell that but it certainly had nothing to do with my posture my posture needs and improvement. Thank you. Well, yeah, so breathing mechanics and breathing strategies people tend to be over breathing early on and this is going to lead to problems. Later so having a more strategic breathing pattern and approach is again a very quick solution. I know that we're going to dive very deep into the mechanism of the energy metabolism and endurance today but as long as we're having a discussion about these brief sort of tidbits of how to improve endurance are there any other ways to improve endurance that are of relatively short time investment, even if they require a lot of energy. Sure, the classic paradigm you're going to find here is that you're going to find a little bit more accurate and that's going to be a little bit more accurate. So I'm going to go ahead and do that. So what are the most important things that you're going to do with endurance? Are there any other ways to improve endurance that are of relatively short time investment, even if they require a lot of energy? Sure. The classic paradigm you're going to find here is steady state long duration posed up against what a lot of folks will now call higher intensity interval training specifically. And there's a lot of misconceptions here. The quick answer is you need to be doing both and there's probably a bunch of stuff in between that you should be practicing. If you honestly want to maximize those three factories we talked about at the beginning, you need to be training across this full spectrum. Just like I told you to train across the full spectrum of your lifting, we want to be doing the same thing here. So are there independent special factors that can happen with the shorter time length, higher intensity stuff. Absolutely. There's also magic that happens on the other end of that spectrum. So it's very important that people don't just choose one side because what tends to happen is people either go with all men to do 30 or 45 minutes of steady state stuff. That's it. Or I'm going to do the opposite, which I'm going to lead that stuff on a table, not do it because I only want to do high intensity intervals because I can get it done in five minutes. So there's magic on both sides of the equation. We want to get into all that. But just to answer your question directly, there's a whole bunch of things you can do in under one minute that are convenient to do. And there's a wonderful set of papers out of a couple of laboratories in Canada that champion this idea that's called exercise snacks. So there's a bunch of there's a series of studies have been done here that are really interesting and that they've looked at a couple of things that are not worthy. One of them is a 20 second bout of all out work. And this is actually done in workers in an office. And so what they had them to is run upstairs. And I believe it was about 60 steps is what it took them something along the order of 20 seconds exactly. And they repeated that about once every four hours. So really it's you go to work, you get you know, put your coffee in your back down whatever you run up a flight of stairs. 20 seconds later than you go right back to work at lunch and before you go home, you sort of repeated there. And if you repeat that that's multiple times a week, you're going to do that. I think they in one of the interventions, it was three times a week for six weeks, 18 total times, you did that. And what you'll see is a noticeable improvement is statistically significant improvements in cardiovascular fitness specifically VO2 max as well as a number of cognitive benefits work productivity, et cetera that can happen in as little as 20 seconds. You don't have to go to the gym. You don't have to shower. You don't have to do anything like that. Just find the stairs. Run up and down a few times. Now you may have noticed you actually sort of caught me yesterday. I did that right here. Right. I was just I we had a little bit of a break. I was feeling an energy law. I ran up to stairs three or four times. Felt a lot better. So that can actually also help. They ran another study when they looked at that following a giant high glycemic index meal. And what they saw and then they took insulin measures and a whole bunch of other biological markers associated that you want to be paid attention with the high glycemic index meal. And they looked at those immediately an hour three hours six hours as opposed. And it was very clear that same intervention was able to improve post plan deal glucose control insulin and a whole bunch of other factors in addition. So if you are the sort of type who's like, wow, I'm in an office all day. Maybe also had a giant high glycemic index meal. Not the best approach, but a little bit of mitigation there can just be running up a flight of stairs or doing something like that for as little as 20 seconds. So there's a lot of magic and power and maximal exertion. If one does not have access to a flight of stairs at work, could they do jumping jacks? Absolutely. I mean, you could do anything you really wanted. It's not the mode of exercise that matters here. It is simply the exertion. You just get up as hard as you can. You could do burpees. You could do any number of things. You could sprint down your road down the hallway back and forth. The mode is just something that was easy for the scientists to control. X number of steps. People could do it. You know, to fall hurt yourself, things like that. Just to remind me, it's once every four hours, one minute of all of the seconds, 20 seconds. 20 seconds of essentially all out exertion while remaining safe, not going so fast up the stairs or doing jumping jacks. So they're not down the stairs up the stairs, please. Escalators don't count. Well, I suppose they count if they're if you're moving, if you're not remaining on the same steps. In fact, in an airport recently, I saw somebody walking against the conveyor while talking on the phone while waiting for their flight to take off. It's genius, right? It looked a little awkward. Who cares? Yeah. But it was I have looked awkward in every airport. I've been in for the last 15 years for these exact reasons doing wild stuff like that. Yeah, well, nothing's more awkward than not being able to walk to the end of the terminal simply because one isn't familiar with walking that far carrying a couple of suitcases. There you go. Yeah, that's the other fit test. This is case carrier. Yeah, I'm in the airport. I love this. So once every four hours, 20 seconds. So maybe once when arriving to work, once four hours in and then four hours, I must be able to probably work somewhere, you know, eight plus or minus two hours. Now one thing I actually really want to make clear because your audience is so incredible. They tend to be really excited about these protocols and they follow them exactly as written. That's not exactly how science works. So it doesn't necessarily have to be every four hours. It doesn't have to be three times a day. It doesn't have to be 20 seconds. They literally built that protocol because it was trying to replicate a real life scenario. Maybe you're in an office building. You're generally there for eight hours. Let's see if you did one every sort of. So if you want to do it four times a week, great. If you can do it only 10 seconds. Amazing. You're probably going to get the same benefits. Those are not the details to pay attention to. The detail to pay attention to is every so often multiple times a day. Try to get your heart rate up really quickly. It doesn't require sweating. It doesn't require anything else. There's no warm up associated with it. Again, you need a minute break in between meetings or whatever and you can sprint up them. I do this all the time in my house. When you have those days when you're on like seven straight hours of zooms, etc. You can get out of 20 seconds. I run to my garage, which is over there. I hop on the air bike and I will just smash out 30 seconds as fast as I can and walk right back. I love it. Yeah. I'm going to start. Yeah, just also you can just put one of those things which I do also just put one in your office and hop over there. The whole entire thing now literally takes 23 seconds. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is also separate from Dr. Andy Galpins teaching and research roles at Cal State Fullerton. It is however part of our desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, we'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Momentus. Momentus makes supplements of the absolute highest quality. The Hubertman Lab podcast is proud to be partnering with Momentus for several important reasons. First of all, as I mentioned, their supplements are of extremely high quality. Second of all, their supplements are generally in single ingredient formulations. If you're going to develop a supplementation protocol, you're going to want to focus mainly on using single ingredient formulations with single ingredient formulations. You can devise the most logical and effective and cost effective supplementation regimen for your goals in addition, Momentus supplement ship internationally. And this is of course important because we realized that many of the Hubertman Lab podcast listeners reside outside the United States. If you'd like to try the various supplements mentioned on the Hubertman Lab podcast, in particular supplements for hormone health, for sleep optimization, for focus, as well as a number of other things including exercise recovery, you can go to live momentus spelled OUS so that live momentus.com slash Hubertman. Today's episode is also brought to us by levels levels is a program that lets you see how different foods and activities affect your health by giving you real time feedback on your blood glucose using a continuous glucose monitor. Many people are aware that their blood sugar, that is their blood glucose level, is critical for everything from fat loss to muscle gain to healthy cognition and indeed aging of the brain and body. Most people do not know however how different foods and different activities, including exercise or different temperature environments impact their blood glucose levels and yet blood glucose is exquisitely sensitive to all of those things. I first started using levels about a year ago as a way to understand how different foods, exercise and timing of food relative to exercise and quality of sleep at night impact my blood glucose levels and I've learned a tremendous amount from using levels. It's taught me when best to eat, what best to eat, when best to exercise, how best to exercise and how to modulate my entire schedule from work to exercise and even my sleep. So if you're interested in learning more about levels and trying a continuous glucose monitor yourself, go to levels.link slash Hubertman. That's levels.link slash Hubertman. Today's episode is also brought to us by element. Element is an electrolyte drink that contains the exact ratios of the electrolyte sodium, magnesium and potassium to optimize cellular functioning for mental and physical performance. Most people realize that hydration is key. We need to ingest enough fluids in order to feel our best and perform our best. But what most people do not realize is that the proper functioning of ourselves and nerve cells neurons in particular requires that sodium, magnesium and potassium be present in the correct ratios. Now of course people with pre hypertension and hypertension need to be careful about their sodium intake. So what a lot of people don't realize is that if you drink caffeine, if you exercise and in particular if you're falling a very clean diet, that is not a lot of processed foods, which of course is a good thing. Chances are you're not getting enough sodium, potassium and magnesium to optimize mental and physical performance. Element contains a science-backed ratio of 1,000 milligrams. That's one gram of sodium, 200 milligrams of potassium and 60 milligrams of magnesium and no sugar. If you'd like to try element, you can go to drink element that's LMNT.com slash Huberman to get a free element sample pack with your purchase. Again, that's drink element LMNT.com slash Huberman to claim a free sample pack. So tell me about endurance. What is endurance? How do I get more endurance? And how does it work? When we think about endurance, I would like to open up the conversation to include more things than people generally do when they hear the word endurance. So if we just think about what you typically ask your body to do or like to ask your body to do and we just walk through them, it's going to be things like this. Number one, I want to have energy throughout the day. That's actually a form of endurance. Great. I don't want to have these lulls and fatigue and I want to feel fantastic as I move throughout my activities of daily living, whatever those may be. Work, exercise, enjoyment, paying attention, focus, all that stuff. Great. That's one thing. Another thing you want to ask your body to do is I want to be able to repeat some small effort in a muscle group and not and feel great about that. This is what we generally call muscular endurance. So this is something like I want to be able to walk up those ten flights of steps and my quads aren't burning at the end of it. Right. Or it's even gives me energy. Another thing you want to ask your body to do is to be able to perform a tremendous amount of work for a longer period of time, something in the realm of you know, 20 to 80 seconds. So this could be something like if you're surfing and you've got a paddle extremely hard for a minute to get on top of a wave or you want to you've got your outriding your bike and you need to be able to get up a hill and it's a very steep hill. These are going to take maximal efforts for some small amount of time and then you'll get back up there. We tend to call that maximum anaerobic capacity. So that the maximum amount of work you can perform at a high rate for some amount of seconds to like maybe a minute. Pass that is your ability to repeat an effort kind of like that for something like five to fifteen minutes. And this is the example would be run a mile. Right. Some interval like that, which is a longer distance. Right. That is going to be your maximum aerobic capacity. Another thing you're going to want your body to do is we call sustain position. So this is you want to be able to sit in your chair at work and have perfect posture for 20, 30, 40 minutes. Right. You want to be able to stand in line at a grocery store for 15 minutes and not have a breakdown and posture. So you want to be able to maintain position when you're riding your bike, you're not collapsing, you're doing any of these activities and you don't get hurt or lose efficiency simply because you couldn't sustain basic positions. Right. Whatever those shapes and positions need to be. And then the last one is a maximum distance. So you want to be able to go for a longer hike or have just a long day at Disneyland for whatever it needs to be and feel great at the end of it. Right. So the goal with all of these things is not can you just do them, but can you do them and then you feel good afterwards. So we're back in a right position where they give you energy. You feel good about it and it's not just something you had to do and you're regretted and you felt awful. So those are the factors I think about when someone says I want better endurance is I want to walk backwards is okay when you say endurance, what do you mean? And that's generally the things I've come across as if you can handle all of those things, you're going to feel like you're in fantastic shape. You're going to feel your recovery is going to be excellent and your physical performance in the gym or any of the sporting activities you do will be enhanced. Given what you told us a little bit earlier that endurance really reflects. Fatigue and management and energy production. How do each and both of those things relate to endurance at a mechanistic level. So really what I'm asking is what is fatigue management and what is energy production in order to do that. It's important that we understand all of those functional capacities that I just talked about. They all have different points of failure. Okay, so in order to then work backwards and say well how do I optimize my performance and all those categories. We need to go through each one and figure out where am I failing. Some of them are going to be failing because of fatigue management and some of them will be failing because of energy production issues. So if we walk through a little bit of how we make energy and how we handle fatigue then we're going to have a better understanding of exactly what to do for each one of these categories. If you feel like one of them in particular is worse for you or lagging behind or if in general you just want to improve all of them. All right, now I want to make a little bit of a 90 degree turn here. I'm going to do a strategy, though I promise. And I want to ask you a very simple question. How do you lose weight? I was taught that the calories in calories out thermodynamics of energy utilization governs most everything that is if I'm ingesting less caloric energy than I burn. Then I'm going to lose weight. And if I'm ingesting exactly as much as I burn maintain weight and if I ingest more than I burn, then I'll gain weight. Sure, that is the approach you would take. What I'm asking really is how are you actually physically losing the weight? So my understanding is that we have different fuel sources in the body, glycogen, which is stored in muscle and liver, body fat, which is stored in mainly white adipose tissue, which is subcutaneous in around our organs, intravissural fat. And that we can also use protein as a fuel. And then as I recall, there's also a phosphocryotene system. And I think you're going to tell me that each of these systems is tapped into on different time scales and perhaps according to different levels of exertion. And I'm certain that what I just said is not exhaustive, but hopefully it is most or entirely correct. Pretty correct. What's I got to do with fat loss? At some point, body fat stores adipose sites, fat cells are going to start liberating fat as a fuel source. And the stimulus for that I'm assuming is going to be that other fuel sources are either depleted or that the energy and metabolic systems of the body. I don't want to say decide because they don't have their own consciousness or are are are are signaling in a way that registers that body fat would be the optimal fuel source given how long or intent and or intensely a given activity has been performed. Okay, we have some stuff to clean up there, but we're still not really answering the question. How am I actually losing that body fat? How is it actually leaving the body? Correct. My understanding is that it leaves the body through respiration. Uh-huh. So now we have some interesting things to talk about. How am I actually losing fat via respiration? What the hell is that even mean? How is something that occupied this physical space on the side of me leaving my body through my mouth? And there's a very clear answer there, right, which I'm sure you're cute up to. When you take a breath in, you're generally breathing in oxygen, O2. There's some other things, but we'll just stick to oxygen. When you exhale, you're breathing out CO2. The difference between those two is that carbon molecule. Well, one of the things that's important to understand here is all of your carbohydrates, which is those that word itself is a carbon that has been hydrated. So it is a carbon molecule attached to a water molecule. It is a simple chain of carbons. Your fat molecules are also chains of carbon. All of metabolism, really, in terms of energy production, is simply trying to figure out a way to break those carbon bonds. As a result, we get energy from that. We use that energy to create a molecule called ATP, which is the central source of energy for any leaving being. Right? That carbon is then floating around in a free form, which is bad news internally. So we've got to figure out a way to get that carbon out of our system. So all of energy production, all of fatigue management, really comes down to this core issue of how are we handling carbon? And how are we moving it around the body? And so what we do is we do this sneaky thing. So another question I'd like to ask people is, why do we breathe? Well, for two reasons. To bring oxygen into the system, into offload carbon dioxide. But the neural trigger for breathing is when carbon dioxide hits a threshold level, and the set of neurons in the brain stem, and elsewhere, activate the frenic nerve or the gas reflex or a combination of things, and we inhale or inhale. Right. So a reduction of oxygen intake generally doesn't stimulate ventilation unless you're at altitude. Then that sort of changes. Right? In general, it's an elevation in CO2 that's going to stimulate breathing out. The only reason you bring in O2 for the most part is to get rid of the CO2. Oxygen is not a fuel source. It works the same with fire, by the way. So you know you have to have oxygen present for a fire to go, and if you squelch, oxygen the fire will go out. That's sort of half of how those like fire extinguishers work. But we think then that means oxygen is the fuel. It is not the fuel. It is something entirely different. It is a necessary product that is necessary for the metabolism process to actually occur. Right. So we're kind of dancing around an idea here, which is this carbon cycle of life. So what happens in plants is they generally will breathe in the opposite and breathe out the opposite of humans. So a plant will breathe in CO2 and exhale O2. This is why we have to have a certain amount of these things, analogy and forests and trees and stuff to maintain this O2 CO2 balance in our atmosphere. We do the opposite. So we have this wonderful circle of life. We breathe in O2, breathe out CO2, they do the opposite. Well, what happens is because carbohydrates are long chains of carbon and fats are as well. Generally when we think about fats, by the way, it's important to understand that structure a little bit. So if we think about triglycerides, it is a three carbon backbone chain of glycerol. So it's one, two, three. And horizontally running off of each one of those are fatty acid chains. So we form this structure that looks like an E, like the letter E, three in the back, and then three chains coming off of it. Each of those chains are called fatty acids, and each of those fatty acids are a length of carbon. A number of carbon is strong together. However many carbons are there, determines which type of fatty acid it is. Stereoc acid, linolyc acid, any different number of things. It's also what determines whether or not it's a mono unsaturated or polyunsaturated, is if carbon requires a special thing called a double bond. So if there's a double bond across every carbon of carbon, then they're all fully saturated and you're great. If there's any of them that are not double bonded, in fact, an example, if there's one that doesn't have a double bond, that is now called mono unsaturated. And if there are many, it is called polyunsaturated. So there's pros and cons to all these things. Right. In either case, we're still talking long carbon chains. So what a plant will do is bring in carbon. And then it has this wonderful ability to use energy from the sun called photosynthesis. And it can take those carbons that it enhales and use the energy from the sun to form a bond. Now in our prior discussion, when we were going over hypertrophy, we talked about the energy required to go through protein synthesis. That's because forming a new atom, or a new bond between atoms oftentimes takes energy in this case, it does. The same thing happens here. So if a plant does not have oxygen, or does not have carbon dioxide in the air, it has no fuel. The basic thing about it is that's what it eats. It needs to get nitrogen from the ground and the soil. It's like we need to get nitrogen from our protein. But fuel lies in the needs to get carbon dioxide. Then it needs sun to give it energy so that it can actually form that bond. That's what it's getting its fuel from. So if we think about a classic plant that produces either a starch or a fruit, here's what happens. It enhales that carbon and it starts packing it away. Now in a root vegetable, what it does is it stores those things together. And if we store that thing and we grow fruit at the bottom of it, we tend to call those things starches. It's going to then take the carbon that is packed away in its root and send it up the tree. And it's going to actually do that by breaking it down into a smaller form of carbohydrate that we tend to often call things like sucrose and glucose. It'll ship that up the tree, it'll go out to the leaves, and it'll convert it into the fruit. And it's going to eventually transform that stuff into smaller carbon, things called fructose. And if we think about the fruit or the sugar in fruit, it's often in the form of fructose or sucrose or a combination in sometimes glucose. So we have these smaller carbon, six carbon chains generally in the form of glucose that are being made from this larger storage of carbohydrates that we call starch. So it's packed in together. Your body does the exact same thing. So if it's a potato and it has a whole bunch of glucose packed away, we call that starch. If it's in your quadricep and we pack about a whole bunch of glucose away, we now call it glycogen. If it's in your blood as that six carbon chain, we call it glucose. If it's in the tree and in the fruit, we call it fructose. Those are different molecules, but that's effectively the same thing happens. So the biology or the chemistry is almost identical. It just runs in the reverse order. And that's why again, tubers and potatoes and stuff tend to be starches and fruits tend to be glucose, fruit, dos and sucrose. So we have this wonderful circle of life. The plants can survive on just breathing in the CO2 and then getting the energy from the sun. We don't have that ability, at least to my knowledge, to run through photosynthesis. So the only way we can get carbon into our system is to actually ingest carbon, which means we have to eat the starch, the fruit, the animal, some other form of stored carbon to get that into our system. We then pack that away. We put the carbohydrates, as you mentioned earlier, either in our liver, our blood or in our muscles. We put the fat generally in adipose tissue. We'll put a little bit in muscle cells, as intramuscular triglycerides. And then the protein will use as structure, right? We'll do different things. We don't like to use protein as material or fuel. It's better use of structure. And what we have to do then is if all the sudden we realize that storage is getting too much in our body, in other words, we're gaining too much weight, we have to figure out how to get the carbons out of our body. And that is metabolism, right? Any time we're trying to break a carbon bonds, though, we can get energy to make ATP. That's going to release the carbon out of our tissue and the blood. We have to bring in oxygen to bind that carbon molecule to make CO2 so we can exhale it and put it back into the atmosphere. It's a beautiful description of the circle of life and energy utilization in the human body. I have to ask the question that I'm sure many people are wondering about, which is if indeed we exhale these carbons and as it relates to fat loss, that is the way that we lose fat if we're in a subchloric state, for instance. Has it ever been explored as to whether increasing the duration or intensity of exhales can accelerate fat loss? I mean, that's sort of the logical extension of what you described. And here, I'm actually interested equally in whether or not the answer is yes, as well as whether it could be no. Because I could imagine if the answer is yes, well, then there's some interesting protocols to emerge from that. But that if it's no, it will reveal to us some important bottlenecks about metabolism and energy utilization. You ever seen those magicians who like show up and they can tell your mom's name or something like that before you because they can sort of think you down a path? Yeah, I mean, not to take us down a deep dive tangent, but I once went to the magic castle in Los Angeles. And I was one of the people called up front and an incredible magician, a named, I think his name was Ozzy Minder, something. I think that's right. Had me write my name on a card in a sharpie pen. I ripped up the card. I ripped it up. I put it in my pocket. And at the end of the 10 or 15 minute bow of him doing a bunch of other tricks, he asked me to look in my right shoe. And under my foot in my right shoe was that card intact. Yeah. And it was no longer in my pocket. And I swear my life, I wasn't a collaborator with it. Yeah. And to this day, it still gives me chills because it, but I don't know how magic. Yeah. Right. Magic. Well, the reason I say that is I've given that little spiel that I just gave you that countless times in my classes. And I would say 99% of the time as soon as I stop, the very first question is, so can I just like do a bunch of exhales and lose fat? Which is wonderful because I was really hoping you would do that and you rolled right into my trap. You landed perfectly. So I look like a magician over here. I feel like I should look in my right shoe right now. No, I asked the question because it's the logical extension of what you laid out. But I know biology to be both diabolical and cryptic, but also exquisite in the way that things are arranged. And you don't get something for nothing. There are no free passes in physiology. That's the saying, no free passes. The answer to your question is yes. A lot 100%. Yes. In fact, that is the only way to go about it. You have two options. You can ingest less carbon or you can expel more carbon. People always say calories in calories out. It's really carbon and carbon on. That's what a calorie is, right? Calories and amount of energy we get per breaking carbon bond. So it's really less in less more out less in is fairly obvious whether that comes in any form. And by the way, this is exactly why the percentage of your intake coming from fans or carbohydrates. It says it doesn't really matter that much. If you look at fat loss, clinical trials, you guys may have covered this. When Lane was in here, I'm sure like this is something he talks about a lot. It doesn't matter. It's irrelevant because it's not about that. There's nothing magic in those things. They are different. They have different physiological responses. Everything is different, right? No, no. But in general, it's just simply about carbon intake turns out fat has a lot more carbons per mole than carbohydrates do. So there's more calories per mole in there. So if you the physical amount of fat needs to come in a smaller amount, physical amount of carbohydrates, will come in as larger amount. But you can play any number of very high carb low fat. What matters total calories, right? Again, it's not like the only thing that matters. But you know what I'm saying? Some percentages in the way can go fat loss works fantastic high fat low carbohydrate. Why why why are the other things work? Because that's not about that. It's about total intake of carbon total expel. So absolutely. Can you lose fat by simply exhaling more? In fact, that is exactly what you did this morning. When I hopped on the airdine bike for what? When you did anything, right? The question is, can you think of a scenario in which you could have a bunch of increased rates of exhalation that helps in fallow's? Sure. Anything of a lot of things that will stimulate increased rates of inhalation. One thing could be simply going, right? So the question is like, can I literally do some breath protocols where I force exhale and lose fat? And the answer is yes. But what happens? What happens if you do hyperventilation training? Well, my lab studies cyclic hyperventilation is one of our many deliberate protocols. And one of the most prominent things that one observes is that levels of adrenaline increase very quickly. Extremely quickly. People feel jittery, anxious, stressed, and unless they are consciously trying to anchor their thinking about what that means and the benefits that to persisting, typically they abort the cycler hyperventilation protocol really quickly. Within seconds, right? You will feel tingling, sweating, all kinds of things. You're hyperventilating, right? And we could we could talk a nauseam about how that changes everything from adrenaline to focus the whole bunch of things. So unfortunately, a strategy of sitting around just exhaling more than you inhale technically helps you lose more fat, but it's not going to last very long. So then the question is, well, how do I get into a situation or scenario in which I can increase my rate of expiration where I'm not going to pass out. I'm not going an altering hypocapnea and hypercapnea issues. Any idea of a situation in which you would have an enhanced rate of explanation without worrying about passing out? To a steady state exercise or not steady state exercise, lifting weights, intervals, moderate training, repeated, any of these things, they all work equally for fat loss because all they're doing is increasing respiration rate. They're saying increased demand for energy, increased exhalation. That's the trick here. And when you equate these things to that, they have equal success in fat loss. It doesn't matter theoretically where you're getting it from. And so when we get into this idea of, well, what are the best training strategies for fat loss? It doesn't matter which one of these tactics you pick as long as you maintain a consistent adherence over time. Because of this exact fact, it doesn't matter if you're burning, quote unquote, fat in the exercise session or if you're burning carbohydrates in the exercise session, it is totally irrelevant to your net fat loss over time. Okay, now there's some significant misconceptions there about what I just talked and I would love to come back and walk through that in more detail. But that's the main take home message here. It won't matter what's coming in and it won't matter what's coming out because in either case, it is the same rate of oxygen in and CO2 out. That's the key metric. And hopefully this helps a lot of people have some relief because they're like, man, you're so tied up on what is the exact protocol for training for optimizing fat loss. What's the exact nutritional intervention I need for fat loss? And then you wonder why all these different diets can work effectively and wonder why all these different training protocols and surely you know somebody who lost a bunch of weight and the only thing they did is they just started running. There was no advanced protocol. They just started running and they ran five miles every day. That works. And then tons of people who tried that and like didn't lose anything. And lots of people who went to, I went to cardio kickboxing class lost weight. Oh, I just started doing intervals on my why why mysteriously do all these things work? They're you have something has some spidey sense have to have to be going off in your brain. We're like, there has to be something linking these things. And what's linking it is simply carbon exchange. So put yourself in a position in which you are exhaling more than you and inhaling without passing out. The other problem is if you were to simply do a breathing protocol. While the rate of exhalation would go up after that, you would correct and go in the opposite direction. So that's the problem is your net carbon output over the course of the day is not going to change unless you increase the demand for energy. And that's how you get into that negative state. Along these lines of exhaling carbons as the route for fat loss. It makes me wonder whether or not increasing lung capacity is possible. I'm guessing the answer is yes. Yeah. And whether or not increasing lung capacity is a good goal and root to enhancing fat loss. Essentially what I'm asking is if you can offload more CO2. Okay, carbon per exhale are you a more efficient fat loss machine. It's a wonderful thought and the answer would be not not something to worry about because if you were to exhale more carbon than actually needed. Now we're in a state of inefficiency. You're burning way more energy than needed to do your activity. The heart has a metric called cardiac output. This is in science. We abbreviate this is Q for some odd reasons. It's either CO or Q and cardiac output is heart rate multiplied by stroke volume. So how many beats per minute you're having as well as how much blood's coming out of it. So cardiac output is actually very specific to energy needs. If you try to work around that, it's just going to adjust itself. So what I mean by this is if you were able to increase your stroke volumes, the amount of blood coming out per pump, you would automatically adjust to reduce your heart rate. So the other thing is that you keep cardiac output exact to energetic demands. So you're sort of pushing one of this spectrum, but your body will pull the other one back to keep you at that exact same neutral level. So if you look at if you think about like cardiovascular adaptations to endurance training, any type of endurance training, a common thing people will understand is resting heart rate. The number is is just how many beats per minute you're having when you're sitting here doing nothing. A very positive adaptation is a lowering of that resting rate over time. As general numbers, what you will hear is people will say things like a normal resting heart rate is between 60 to 80 beats per minute. You know, if any of the things I've talked about with the individuals I work with, I don't work with anybody with disease, just to clarify that I don't do anything with disease management treatment, anything. It's always about people who are in a good spot, who want to optimize or get the next level, whether this is professional athletes trying to to peak for physical performance or the folks in our rapid health optimization program that feel good. Again, it's not disease stuff and they want to feel incredible. One of the metrics we're going to pay attention to is this resting heart rate. So what here's what happens as you improve your endurance. Your resting heart rate will go down if I see somebody over 70 beats per minute, unless something's going on, you're not physically fit. Regardless of whether or not that is quote unquote within the normative values, I want to see everybody some 60 beats per minute or close. That's not a difficult thing to really get to for most people. So if you train a lot, regardless of how you train intervals, steady state, doesn't matter, that resting heart rate will come down. But since energy demands at rest haven't really changed, cardiac alpha stays the same. So what happens is stroke volume goes up. So literally like we trained your quadriceps on the leg stands machine to get stronger. So you can produce more force per contraction. The heart will do the exact same thing. And so as you're able to get more of the blood out of your heart per pump, the heart realizes I don't need to pump as often. So that's the compensatory adaptation, which is saying, hey, look, I don't need to beat 60 times a minute. I now need to beat 55 times a minute because I'm getting the same amount of blood out per pump. And this is why your resting heart rate goes down, your resting stroke volume goes up, but your cardiac output is identical. So that's not a good metric of fitness. It's going to stay the same. Cardiac output will only adjust per energetic changes, energy requirements in the acute moment. How much do I need? Go, which is going to be determined by ventilation, right? How much air am I bringing in and putting out that's going to determine cardiac output and that's going to determine where we're at. If you were to do like a sub-maximal exercise test, when you were unfit to when you're fit or when you're fit to where you're super fit at sub max, you're going to see the same thing. Cardiac output will be identical and you're like, damn, nothing happened. What you're not realizing is your heart rate at that same workload is now lower. And that's efficiency because your stroke volume is higher, where it gets people tripped up is that max. Because you may not see a much of a change at max because you won't really you don't really see an increase in maximum heart rate with fitness. That's not a thing. So maximum heart rate is not a good proxy for fit or unfit or anything like that. Stroke volume will get limited eventually by filling capacity of your heart. It has to have so much time to fill up with blood before I can contract again and squeeze the blood out. And when you have a heart rate of 200 beats per minute, that just doesn't leave much time to fill. And so it won't really push you past that. So don't worry about trying to increase your maximum heart rate. That's not necessarily a good thing and won't really change. But your cardiac output will because stroke volume will be higher. But that doesn't necessarily mean that I should avoid training that gets me up toward maximum heart rate. Correct. Oh, you should absolutely do it. That's what that was my assumption. I'd like to take a brief break and acknowledge our sponsor, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is a vitamin mineral probiotic and adaptogen drink. Designed to help you meet all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens daily since 2012. So I'm delighted that they're a sponsor of this podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day is that it helps me meet all of my foundational nutritional needs. That is, it covers my vitamins, my minerals, and the probiotics are especially important to me. Athletic Greens also contains adaptogens, which are critical for recovering from stress, from exercise, from work, or just general life. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to Athletic Greens.com slash Huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3K2. Again, if you'd like to try Athletic Greens, go to Athletic Greens.com slash Huberman to claim the special offer. Getting back to energy production and metabolism. So we've got these different modes of moving energy, but making and breaking energy bonds in the body, moving energy into different tissues and out of different tissues and indeed out of the body. How do each of these different modes of energy utilization relate to different modes of movement and exercise? In my mind, I'm starting to draw a bridge between, okay, when I walk for 60 minutes, you know, if I'm talking, I'm breathing a bit more. Maybe I'm burning a little more fat. After all, speech is a modified exhale. And if I'm sprinting, breathing differently. And if I'm, you know, doing a 30 minute moderate, quote unquote, moderate jog, breathing differently. So you've beautifully illustrated this bridge between energy production and utilization and carbon dioxide offload through acceleration. What are some of the specifics about energy utilization according to different modes of exercise? And if we could better define modes of exercise or types of exercise that trigger specific adaptations, I think this is where the bridge will move from being a mere line to a real structure. Yeah, absolutely. I want to lay one more foundational piece. And then it's going to be much easier to understand the limitations that put on some of these training protocols. As well as the lack of limitations. Okay, so it's really, really important. The way I want to start this is we have this foundation now of carbon and basic energy production. That's not to say there's no difference. There is. And that difference is important. But maybe we can answer the question from earlier, which is actually something you asked me this morning. We were exercising. You're like training fasted, right? Does training fasted enhance fat loss? And the logic is sound. If I don't have any fuel, then I should be burning more fat. Therefore, I should be losing more fat. It's sound. It's not true. It's a great idea. It's one of these classic things in science and exercise for the physiology where it sounds good. Turns out it's not. It's actually a pretty gross misunderstanding of metabolism. So it's not to pick on that topic. I don't really care about that topic, but it is a it's a common question. It also gives me an opportunity to just tell you more about metabolism. So here's what happens. You are breathing in O2 and breathing out CO2. However, the ratio to that is what we call the either RER respiratory exchange ratio or RQ respiratory quotient. And I'm not going to differentiate those two. They're not the same thing, but we're going to skip past that for now. As you begin to increase exercise intensity, the percentage of O2 to CO2 rises in the favor of CO2. So you start breathing out way more CO2 than you are breathing in O2. And so if we were to look at that number, you know, what's the relationship, it goes up. So at rest, most people have a of a value that we would typically call something like 0.6. Okay. And that's again, the relationship between O2 and CO2. Maybe 0.7. If you were to go for a walk, that increases slightly because you're now expiring CO2 at a higher rate. So now you've moved up to say 0.8 or something like that. One of the ways that we mark somebody of achieving an actual VO2 max on a test is if that value exceeds 1.1. Now, any of you who are paying attention are thinking, well, wait a minute, how the hell can a ratio between two things ever get past one? Well, that's because you're getting into place where you're actually offloading more CO2 than is actually necessary. And this is what actually causes and explains a thing that people like to call epoch, which is excess exercise post oxygen consumption. This is another way to think about it. The only reason you're breathing is to bring in oxygen when I'm floating CO2. Right. If I'm no longer exercising, why am I still breathing? In other words, once you stop the demand or the need for energy, you should stop ventilating, but you don't. Right. That's because in the case of low intensity exercise, the second you stop, you're right back down to resping ventilation. No problem, because you were able to match the need for energy with the offload of waste, one to one during that exercise. When you start creeping up the intensity, you can't do that. So you have to basically start stealing a little bit of fuel here. So even though you're done exercising, you're still ventilating because you have to pay that back. And pay that back by that I specifically mean you have to bring in oxygen because you have a whole bunch of waste that's been accumulating in your tissue that you've got to deal with. Now walk you through what that wastes is a particular molecule that a lot of people have heard of but grossly misunderstand. So you got to be able to handle that. So the reason that you sit there and go and continue to ventilate is because you're now trying to pay back that excess post exercise oxygen debt. That's that oxygen debt we're specifically talking about. So that being said, as we start cruising up that our queue starts going up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up So the idea that I will lose more fat by being in an exercise situation that is burning more fat. It seems to make sense, but it's a massive failure to understand the metabolism. It's the exact same explanation to like exercising fasted doesn't matter. So the exercising fasted issue under normal circumstances is irrelevant because you have plenty of fuel in the system even when you haven't eaten breakfast that morning. Now if you're talking like extended fasting over multiple days, this is a different scenario. If muscle glycogen, liver glycogen, and blood glucose are at sufficient levels, then you absolutely have enough energy to perform almost any type of exercise that most people are doing. Maybe if you're Rob and you're at mile 20 today, it's a different story, but the vast majority of us have plenty of fuel sitting around. So we're not going to burn more into fat just because we didn't eat breakfast that morning. So that just doesn't make energetic sense. We have a lot of backup supplies you're never out. The trick here is this is there's a concept here we call crossover concept. So as we are starting to move up exercise intensity, we start burning a higher percentage of our fuel from carbohydrates and a lower percentage of our fuel coming from fat. I'm sleeping. That's the highest percentage of your fuel that will be coming from fat of any activity you could ever do. If the theory that I'm going to stay at a lower intensity to burn more fat was true, the optimal fat burning strategy would then be to sleep. Like that doesn't make sense. Of course it doesn't. So why would then going at a slightly elevated rate somehow all of a sudden magically make you lose fat. It doesn't actually make sense when you think about that. We were like, oh yeah, there's no way. So it's a percentage trick. It's a difference between absolute and relative. This is what this confusion is. So yes, as you start doing lower intensity exercise, whether you're faster, no, no, it's irrelevant. But lower intensity exercise, a greater percentage of your fuel is coming from fat. However, your total fuel expenditure is very low. So that whole total carbon balance is not really being shifted much. As you start exercising in a very high intensity, you actually start getting a higher percentage of your fuel from carbohydrate and a lower percentage from fat. In fact, at rest about the highest you can get in most people is about 60% of your fuel from fat. As you're sleeping, you might be 70% but you'll never be in a position ever no matter what sort of thing you've heard on the internet. You'll never be in a situation where fat is your only fuel source. The highest I've probably ever seen is like 70%. You should probably be it about that. That's a kind of a good number to think, honestly. But people will understand a little bit of amount of metabolism to be dangerous, but not enough. We'll throw out these terms like fat adapted and fat adapted is a real thing, but is a mass of misunderstanding oftentimes. It is this idea of thinking like I can get into a spot where I'm maximizing fat burning, maximizing fat burning and maximizing fat for exercise and maximizing fat loss over time are not the same thing at all. That's the confusion. If you enhance fat oxidation and exercise, that does not enhance fat loss per se. This is a lot of the confusion that's happening. As we start moving up, we can never get into position where we're using fat only as a fuel again at best you're at 70% fat, 30% carbohydrate. For a lot of reasons, we probably just don't have time to get into today. However, the opposite is possible. When you get into true high intensity exercise, you'll be basically 100% carbohydrate and 0% fat. That is very positive. That in fact is 1.0. That's a very good one point one is actually because your ventilation got so high you actually exceeded that number, even though you're at 100% carbohydrate. This is what people came up with the idea that it's like, well, I don't want to burn carbs. I want to lose fat. My response to that is always like, okay, great. It makes sense burning fat, losing fat, burning carbs is losing what then? Do you think you're liver shrunk? Wait a minute. What did you lose that? Where did it come from? It's all coming as carbon. Don't worry about where it came from for your fuel. It just has to come out as carbon. There are differences in exercise efficiency for performance with our professional athletes, of course. But if the only goal here is fat logs, it doesn't matter where you get it from. The last bridge we have to connect here is like, wait a minute. If I only burned carbohydrate, how did I actually lose that fat? There was that love handle sitting on the side of me. How did that come out of me? If I never burned that from my fuel. What you're failing to understand is there's a balance scheme that happens here. If you were to do a bunch of high intensity exercise training, and you burned only muscle glycogen and blood glucose, and maybe even you did it for so long, you burned some liver glycogen. The body understands that it has expelled a lot of energy from that side of the equation. It's going to do a couple of things. Now, it's very difficult to go through this fancy situation where you convert carbohydrates into fat and back and forth. That's actually fairly hard. What's easier to do is something you said earlier is actually just bias energetics to a different fuel source. In that scenario, where you're down really low in your carbohydrate stores, any carbohydrates you bring in are going to go to storage. Since your net energy expenditure is something that your body regulates a lot, any fat that you then bring in is going to be utilized as a fuel source because it knows it doesn't need it anymore. That is in excess. That's how you actually use fat as a fuel because you've burned down carbohydrate stores. As I'm hearing this, a couple of things come to my first of all. Thank you for that incredibly important description of what is otherwise a very confusing landscape for most people. One of the key points I took away, and I just want to say from the outset, this is not exhaustive by any stretch, is that burning fat does not equal losing fat from the body. Then burning fat has to be divided into burning of body fat stores. We need to distinguish that from burning of dietary fat that is brought in. Oftentimes people don't disambiguate those. I'm also understanding that reducing one's body carbohydrates stores, muscle glycogen, liver glycogen, etc. occurs during high intensity exercise. That is one very efficient way to tap into those stores, which makes me wonder, again this is one of these things that does it lead to a protocol, makes me wonder whether or not doing high intensity, let's say weight training for 45 to 60 minutes, 75 minutes of strength training, power training, hypertrophy training, which we've covered in an episode about those topics. And then doing some steady state cardiovascular exercise, is there any benefit to that arrangement that would quote unquote enhance body fat loss from the body, to be very specific now, because unlike the idea that training fasted would shift the bias towards fat loss, which it doesn't, you've told us. Under those conditions, muscle glycogen and maybe even liver glycogen is going to be depleted. Put simply, can I enhance body fat loss by doing some cardio after about a weight training? If you equate for total energy expenditure, it won't matter. Now, you did bring up a very important point that I want to clarify. If you look at the exercise modalities that we laid out in our previous conversations, we talked about nine different adaptations, one was skill and then speed, power, strength, hypertrophy, muscular endurance, anaerobic capacity, aerobic capacity, and long duration endurance. Now, speed, power, and skill development have almost no benefit for fat loss, because remember, those are low weight, a lot of rest and low volume. They're not really really going to be helpful. You can make a little bit of a case for strength, a little bit, but the total energy expenditure for strength training, even if it's an hour, if it's truly strength training, it's fairly low. Because the repetitions are in the one to three range. That's exactly. It's not enough for total work. So if you're trying to develop a protocol that sort of optimizes fat loss, which you want to do, you're close. And my opinion is to a combination of something in the hypertrophy slash muscular endurance, strength training realm. So six to 30 repetitions, something like that resistance training, great, deplete muscle glycogen, maybe even a bit of liver glycogen. Maybe a little bit depending on if you're doing it for a long time, but probably not a noticeable amount. Okay, so an hour of hypertrophy type training, if you're training hard with low rest and rules, and you really did an hour, you would for sure get there. But most people don't because you're taking a lot of crazy, large balls of oatmeal and rice after I do weight training. Yeah, you mean, you're applying it, muscle glycogen. Totally, right. Then you maybe do a little bit of very high intensity, maximum heart rate, well overvealed to max. Hard as you can for 20, 30, 45, 60 seconds, something like that with some recovery, a lot of recovery and repeated. And that's going to do a great job of replenishing muscle glycogen, right. If you do that long enough, you'll get the liver, but again, most people don't because it's really, really hard to go that hard. So liver is sort of last, last resort. Yeah, basic mechanics here, which will actually get into as our like third segment here is energy production comes from the local exercising muscle, first and foremost from phosphocreatine and carbohydrate stores. And again, and we store it in a muscle we call it glycogen. That's your first sign of light on defense. If you need glucose outside of that, you're going to start pulling it from the blood. But one of the things your body regulates a handful of things over almost everything blood pH, blood glucose, blood pressure and electrolyte concentrations, like it really does not want to mess with those things at all. It will change almost anything else in the body to keep those things standardized, right. You generally because you need all those things for your brain to work and your brain will stop working, right. If you lose blood pressure, you won't go up there. pH changes, you can't run metabolism, electrolytes change, you can't think. And glucose is a primary fuel source for the brain. It's going to be a problem, right. So if that number starts to come down because you're grabbing glucose out of the blood, your liver is going to then kick in. It's going to break down its glycogen to put glucose into the blood to keep the blood number the level. In fact, one of the things you'll see is blood glucose concentrations rise during exercise. They don't fall. In fact, they rise as an anticipatory state. If you train a lot, your blood glucose will start going up before you start moving. It knows it's coming, right. So you you can play that game. You can rob Peter to pay Paul for a long time until your liver runs out. And that's what actually is a bunk in terms of like long duration endurance stuff. You're talking many, many, many miles several hours typically. We say, oh, it's got to be over two hours before your liver starts to become a real problem. Or it has to be tremendously intense because of those reasons. You have to burn through just a lot of energy before your liver starts to get into a problem. You can continue to train when your muscle glycogen levels are low. In fact, people say glycogen to completion of muscle, but it's it's generally misnomer. And you are going to have tremendous signals of fatigue when that number gets lower than 75%. So people think that like their muscles are getting heavy, you're probably still 75% full. A lot of folks will cook quit around the 50%. The highest I've ever seen is like 95% true to completion. And that's an extremely high level cross country skiers and like their deltoid gets very, very low. Some very talented runners will get fairly low in their quads. But the vast majority of folks by the time you're 50% depleted, you're going to quit. It's going to be really, really challenging. So you're never really going to get that low. It's like a bit of a protective mechanism, right? But when your liver gets low, you're going to be shut down. And that's the case if you've ever been to like a marathon and you've seen people run like 25 and a half miles. And then they just like bonk. They go into like baby deer walking stands and then they collapse and you're like, how are you mentally weak? Like you ran 26 miles and you can't run the last point. And a mentally weak. It is if your liver is done, it's going to stop you because there's no more backup reserves muscle. You can get away with. You can push through it. Liver will not let you go any farther. I find this fascinating because it makes me wonder whether or not the liver being depleted sends a neural signal to the brain. Or the brain must register some signal like I would like to be alive tomorrow. Thank you. Whatever is happening right now. Stopping is going to be safer than continuing. Yeah. And so that stop signal is one that I think a lot of people, including myself, are intrigued by because we always think that it's related to willpower. But the brain needs to preserve itself. And as the master computer, I mean, there are ways to go into kind of automaton type, you know, not thinking just doing type behavior. You have override switches, right? And you can play those cards and you can get better at learning and be being less sensitive to that switch. That's exactly what happened when you first start training. Right. You start to realize like, oh my gosh, I'm super tired. And then you realize really quickly like, oh, I'm totally fine here. And this is like the pick pick your person who's made sayings like this, but it's like you're really only 10% depleted or 30% or 40% or some were all operating 40% of what we could do. Of course, any of those things are true because it is like a little bit of an override. You've just gotten very sensitive to being a small percentage depleted and you've learned, okay, I'm tired. And there is a long way to go past that. But once you get past that and you flip that override switch a lot, you just you're going to break quickly because you basically learned to ignore that signal and problems can happen really quickly after that. And that's even experienced endurance athletes. If you hit that level, it's like you're going to be hitting the concrete next. That's potentially a problem. I want to make sure I understand a concept that you referred to earlier correctly because I have a feeling that I don't. And that's this issue of how the body accesses body fat stores. When in a subcalleric state and I'm doing mainly glycogen burning exercise. Yeah. What I heard you say and please correct me where I'm undoubtedly wrong. What I heard you say was that, okay, I go into the gym and I start lifting weights. I'm burning muscle glycogen mostly local to the muscles that I'm using. And then I start pulling glycogen from the bloodstream. Maybe there's some body fat stores that are mobilized probably not dipping into my liver glycogen. Okay, I complete the workout. Maybe I even hop on the airdine bike and do a little sprint. Yeah. I go for a jog. Maybe I eat immediately afterward. Maybe I don't eat for a few hours afterwards. But across the day, I ingest fewer calories than I burn. Is it the case that body fat is mobilized in order to replace the glycogen that my subcalleric intake was insufficient to provide? In other words, because I didn't eat enough to fill the glycogen stores. Am I using body fat converted into glycogen to fill those stores? Right. And if so, is that a case where I'm no longer exhaling carbons in order to burn body fat? But rather, I'm repurposing body fat into muscle. Have I turned fat into muscle in that case? Yeah, I'm really glad you asked this because I did a very poor job on that last point talking about earlier. I'm realizing playing back in my head because that's so many really good questions. You cannot turn fat into muscle. Can you turn muscle into fat? No. I'm so glad you said that because when I was in college, our, I don't want to out that person. The physiology teacher seemed to think still at that point that one could lift weights, get muscular, but then it would eventually turn into body fat. That myth has, I think, largely been dispelled. I heard that so many times as a kid, I heard it so many times in college, I heard it so I hear it so many times in our undergraduate students from other faculty and such. So no, they're not the same structures. They are very different. Let me take a shot and answer this better. You were really, really, really close. So yeah, if you were to do that type of exercise where you've burned a lot of muscle glycogen, how is it I'm losing stored fat? That's really the crux of the question. It doesn't even actually matter if you then went ahead and ingested carbohydrates or fat post-exercise. That's not really the thing. You hit on a couple of key things. Number one, this is all under the assumption that total caloric intake is still low. You have to have low total need for... I also want to flag calories in, calories out is not the only thing that matters. This is a very complex thing. Calories in is incredibly complicated. Calories out is even more complicated. So we just... Maybe another series we can spend on that alone. So don't go nuts about that. You have to be hypocaloric one way or the other. If you burn a bunch of muscle glycogen and you are hypercaloric, you're still going to add fat. If you burn a bunch of muscle glycogen and you're hypocaloric, you're going to lose fat. Think about it this way. You're in a negative calorie state. Where are those calories going to come from? Are you going to reduce your muscle glycogen storages permanently? No. No. Are you going to reduce your glycogen storage in your liver? No. You want to reduce blood glucose? No. No way, right? So where is that extra energy coming from? It's coming from your storage fat. It is your backup reserve energy system. The way that I want to flag this year is people tend to think about it as like carbohydrates versus fat. It's more like a chain, more like a bicycle, where there's a front gear and a back gear. You turn one gear, it turns the other one. These are complementary systems. They are not and or systems, right? You're turning one. And when we go through carbohydrate metabolism, maybe here in a second, you'll understand why you have to have an anaerobic and an aerobic component to that. There is absolutely no way to complete carbohydrate metabolism without oxygen. That has to happen. The only way to engage in fat metabolism is aerobic and oxygen. There's no anaerobic component to it. There's a fundamental difference there. So your carbohydrates are meant to be incredibly flexible. It is the primary fuel source for a reason. Your fat is not meant to be flexible. It is meant to be unlimited. That's the basic point. So you want flexibility over here and then unlimited capacity over there. Now I'm safe, guarded against any energetic need. I need to run up a hill for safety. Cool. Carbohydrates are there. I need to then run for 17 hours. Cool. Fat is there. We want both of these systems. You want to be able to have great energy throughout the day. You want a slow drip coming from fat. You don't want up and down, up and down. You'll be able to think very quickly and get hyperbolic. Very quickly and get hyper focused. Boom. Carbohydrates ramp right up. Get it into the brain, get thinking better, get thinking clearly fast. So we want all of these, not just for exercise purposes, but for activities of daily living, we want an optimal system here. And when people use the terms like fat adapted, they're generally hijacking that. And they're thinking, it used to be a thing we set all the time in like all of my undergraduate classes for years. And that idea of metabolic flexibility is using optimal fuel sources and optimal times, not maximizing fat usage. People have co-opted that term of metabolic flexibility to be like, oh yeah, yeah, therefore learn how to maximize fat burning. That's not what that term means. That term means maximizing your ability to use whatever fuel is optimal in that time. Now I'll grant you, most people aren't fantastic at using fat as a fuel source relative to the other direction. But nonetheless, the gold standard here should be maximizing both. Alright, finally answering your question. If I were to burn a bunch of muscle glycogen, how am I losing that fat? Well, the fuel you're ingesting in that hypochloric state is going to say, hey look, we have a lot of muscle glycogen, we have to replenish. So any carbohydrate that comes in needs to be biased towards storage. It's got to go into those tissue. Any fat that comes in, or doesn't even come in, but any fat that we're using for fuel needs to be utilized for activity. And that's where the caloric expenditure from fat comes in. So you're basically saying your general physiology, the energy for that starts coming from fat. And the energy that's coming in from carbohydrate needs to be simply stored. And so what you see is your respiratory cushion changes. Right, the RER is going off. And so in the exercise moment, it's shot way up for carbohydrates and shot way down for fat. As a compensatory response, it goes the other direction. Because your body is saying we are low on carbohydrates, don't use them for fuel. Unless we absolutely have to, right? So use them for storage. Get our fuel from the fat side of the equation. And so what you're generally going to say is like, oh, I'm burning more fat just sitting around after things like that. And that's not even taking into the equation, the epoch part, which is like, it's not actually as large as people think. It is, it's fairly small. But it adds up sort of over time. So does that explain a little bit better about how you lose fat when you actually only burn carbs for exercise? You explained it beautifully. You talked about epoch, the post-exercise, oxygen consumption. Not being that significant in terms of energy utilization. Even though today we're talking about endurance in different forms of endurance, I do have to ask whether or not people consider the elevation in basal metabolism that occurs when there's more muscle around. Yeah. Because muscle is such a metabolically demanding tissue. You know, if is there a straightforward-ish equation, you know, if one adds one pound of lean muscle tissue to their body, even if it's distributed across multiple muscle groups, does that equate to a caloric need of X number of calories per day? And is that because of the muscle protein synthesis needs of that muscle, or it's glycogen storage needs, or both? If you don't have enough muscle, you start to have problems with fat loss. It's difficult challenge. If you have enough muscle and you're just trying to get extremely large, if you're FFMI is 24 and you're 15% body fat, if I add a more muscle, it's not really going to play a lot in the equation. And here's why. Muscle is more metabolically active at rest than fat. But fat is not an urge. So fat is still going to burn a small number of calories. Muscle burns more, but it's not nearly what people think it is. I'm a muscle guy. I'm a muscle physiologist. I would love to get people to have more muscle for any excuse I can. It's not honest to say that though. You're talking about when I was in undergraduate, we would say numbers like 50, K-Cals per day per pound, is what you can look at, right? So if you put on a pound of muscle spread across the body, your basal metabolic rate would go up by around 50 calories per day. I think that number is grossly exaggerated. It's probably a tenth of that. Six to ten calories. Maybe it's hard to know exactly what that number is, but the more recent estimates are something like that. So now on one hand, you could say, oh my gosh, that is not even meaningful. The other hand, you could say that's super meaningful. It just depends on time domain. You want to put that out, right? So if you were to put on five pounds of muscle and your basal metabolic rate went up 30 or 40 calories a day, well, over the course of a thousand days, that actually adds up. So you could slice this anyway you want. Now maybe that number somewhere in between. I don't really know. It's not a field I pay that much attention to candidly, because it's not a metric kind of like epoch, where it's like, we used to really harp on it. And now it's sort of like, well, maybe we exaggerated that, like, honestly, just a bit. But to me, it doesn't change the equation much, because if you don't have enough muscle, as I described there, other consequences that are going to make fat loss hard. And so you need to have sufficient muscle. If the additional caloric expenditure is the carrot, great. If it's something else, I don't really care. There's just enough evidence that you need to have it. Or I should say, there's enough evidence that it will really help you in your path. Maybe a few calories here there is not really that thing. Especially if you understand a normal food item, anything you pick is going to be probably a couple of hundred calories. One bad food choice today, well, outkick, almost any amount of coverage you got on an adding muscle mass to you. So like, you're really stepping over a dollar to pick up a dime. If you're worried about how many calories you're getting from adding muscle, fat loss is going to be about regulating that carbon intake above and beyond anything else. I'd like to take a brief break to acknowledge our sponsor, Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health and well-being can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. One issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, however, is that you get information back about various levels of lipids and hormones and metabolic factors, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. Inside Tracker makes knowing what to do with all that information exceedingly easy. They have a personalized platform that lets you see what your specific numbers are, of course, but then also what sorts of behavioral dos and don'ts, what sorts of nutritional changes, what sorts of supplementation would allow you to bring those levels into the ranges that are optimal for you. If you'd like to try inside Tracker, you can visit inside Tracker.com slash Huberman to get 20% off any of Inside Tracker's plans. Again, that's inside Tracker.com slash Huberman to get 20% off. So I've heard about this concept of metabolic flexibility mentioned a few times. Frankly, you're the first person who's ever explained it to me in a clear and concise way. How do I know if I am metabolically flexible and how do I increase my metabolic flexibility? Sure. There's no specific standard, which is actually a good thing. And so if you have a level of specificity that you want or need metabolically, then you don't actually want to be in this middle ground. An example would be if you are a performing in a type of exercise or an athlete who performs in a sport that is likely to be dominated, you don't want to be optimally metabolically flexible. You don't want to be super, quote unquote, fat adapted. You want to be biased towards the energy you're going to use. The same could be true for the other end of the spectrum. So in those particular cases, it's not optimal to be equally effective because there are no free passes in physiology. Right? Your energy-producing systems will up-regulate or down-regulate accordingly. So you will actually limit your ability to say maximally utilized carbohydrates as a fuel if you're trying to up-regulate your ability to use fat as a fuel. And so this is like, there's a saturation point. Outside of that spectrum, most people would just say, hey, like, I want to feel great throughout the day to be able to do a bunch of different things. How do you know? Couple of things. There's a lot of biological markers you can take. There's also just some practical takes. Now none of these markers by themselves are any sign. What you want to do is probably a couple of them. And then say, OK, this is maybe a clue. So again, it's really important emphasize not a single one of these tests that I'm about to walk you through. Automatically means you can't use fat as a fuel, or the other case, which is maybe your poor using carbohydrate as a fuel. So disclaimers aside, we'll get into a couple of them. So should we think about these as informative and useful but not diagnostic? Exactly. We call this data-inspired or data-led and not data-driven. Great. OK, cool. So number one, you want to think about just overall functionality. Do you have a reasonable regulation of your energy throughout the day? Now many things could be going into this, which is why these are not specific diagnostics. But as a basic measure, we talked about blood glucose levels. You know, a lot of people will say, again, you want that to be something like between 80 and 90 milligrams per deciliter is a blood glucose level. And if you can go look at the cutoff points for what determines to be pre-diabetic and type 2 diabetic, et cetera. What I can actually recommend, this is... There's a little bit of science here actually, then I'll talk you through, but a lot of this is my personal preference. I generally want people to be at 85 or lower. And that's because of a couple of things. Number one, there's actually some papers that showed any... Every single point increase above 85. Increases your likelihood of developing type 2 diabetes by about 6%. Okay, great. So technically, while maybe 90 or 95 are even up to 100 are, you know, in the quote-unquote normative values, that's one clue. Again, it's not definitive by itself. It doesn't mean anything. You need to really pay attention to what increasing by 6% actually means. But it's a data point where I'm looking at. If I actually then see symptomology, and we run you through, maybe some questionnaires, ask how you're feeling throughout the day, and we see uncontrolled energy about. So you're a lot of energy, then you get really, really tired and swings. Okay, another data point. And we may patch a few of these things together. That may give me some clues. That being said, again, a lot of this rhetoric is used to then scare people off of carbohydrates. And that is... I want to be as clear as possible. That is not... Not truly... The only thing people should care about, right? It can be a thing. It can also be unrelated. There are reasons you could have blood glucose concentrations at this level, or energy swings that are unrelated to carbohydrate and gestion at all. All right, so one test you can have you run. In addition to that, if you're going to get blood glucose measured, you can look at some markers we talked about earlier, which are AST and ALT. We talked about how you can kind of look at that AST to ALT ratio before. You can actually do the inverse, which is look at ALT and AST. The kind of normative value there you're going to look at is like 0.8. I actually like to see it lower than that. And that alone has been actually associated with blood glucose dysregulation. And so if you see multiple of these signs again, we're looking for patterns and patterns and patterns in both, in our case, biomarkers, symptomology, and performance. And now if all three of those things are lining up, you may have an issue. So performance wise, a couple of little tests you can run. Ideally, you have some sort of standard workout you do. And hopefully it's pretty objective. So in other words, I run the same 15 minute loop every morning for my cardio. Oh, okay, great. How long does it take you to run that loop? You could pick whatever distance. It doesn't really matter. What's your heart rate during that thing? And then what's your perceived exertion? Now, you should be able to do that fasted with very little drop in performance. If you can do that, then that tells me you're fairly good at using a fat as a view source. If however, the one day you go to do your standard workout and you feel awful fasting, that may be another clue that perhaps you're not very good at dialing in that system. If your recovery afterwards in terms of heart rate recovery is very long, it may be another clue that you have a poor utilization of fat as a fuel source. The inverse can also be true. So if I give you something in the neighborhood of like 50 or so grams of carbohydrate and 30 minutes later, your face is falling off the table, that's a good sign that you're in the opposite. You're actually very, very, very poor utilizing carbohydrate as a fuel. And the reason I bring that up is that is equally a problem. We hear people a lot make comments like, man, I have to stay away from carbs, I crash really hard if I do them. What that actually means is you're very poor at utilizing carbohydrates as fuel. You're getting your sensitivity is way off. We should be able to have carbohydrate at a reasonable dosage of 50 grams and not fall asleep 30 minutes later or have to run to caffeine. So that is a sign in our opinion. This is again now just my practical brain telling you is that's a sign of dysfunction. We should be able to have plenty of carbohydrates through the day if we choose to, if we want to for any reason. Now of course, if you were to throw 150 or 200 grams of carbohydrate in your belly, you're probably going to take a little bit of an energy hit after that. But we should be able to have a reasonable dosage and not have to fall asleep afterwards. What is one way that people can enhance their utilization of carbohydrates for exercise? The reason I ask is I think I fall into that category. I do consume some complex carbohydrates and fruit post-resistance training. That tends to be when I'm hungriest for them. But typically, unless I've just done some resistance training, I keep most of my daytime meals relatively low carbohydrate and then in the evening I prefer slightly less protein and more carbohydrate. Because it has this effect of sedating me a little bit, and I sleep well. And I know this runs against what everyone was taught, which is to not eat carbohydrates late the day. But I like it because then I tend to wake up in the morning with at least as far as I can tell. My glycogen stores not necessarily topped off, but certainly filled. And I'm able to train fasted in the morning. And my favorite pre-workout is consists of water and caffeine and electrolytes. And maybe some supplementation as well. But I love training fasted. So there's actually a number of things. One little sticky thing you can get through in there is actually the use of caffeine. So that's another sign. If you have to have caffeine to do your fasted training, that's generally another sign you're never very good at using fuel. So I use caffeine prior to resistance training workouts. Generally, I don't need it for any kind of cardiovascular training. Yeah. And when I say that, it doesn't mean it's bad. It's just like another clue of this. Like, okay, you should be able to do this without having to have caffeine to execute it. Now, using caffeine to get a better result is sort of different as an ergodetic aid. We actually use a lot of high carbohydrate meals at the end of the day. A lot of times we're out there to our cutting weight or trying to reduce weight. So it is a fantastic way to handle a lot of things. And that idea that if you eat carbs late at night, that'll increase fast. So that's all is so old and so well destroyed scientifically. That's not a concern. There's just so much data showing. In fact, there's so much data on like eating timing is generally poorly understood when you can eat and what you can eat eating in the morning versus eating at night. A lot of what we've heard there is stuff. Maybe we just save that for another day because we're going to get really far down. That's about a week and that's it. Yeah. But I think our plan is to cover that in an episode on nutrition, which is in this series. The only thing that I would add to it is you know what you hear about ingesting carbohydrate late at night. I should just say that at least in my case, I'm eating the majority of my carbohydrate unless I trained resistance train early in the day in which I said I post resistance training in the last meal of the day. But for me, that's not really late at night. That last meal is somewhere between 630 and 730 p.m. So it's three or so hours or something like that before it was a brown 1010 30 or so. Yeah. So it's not you know midnight balls of pasta. I've done that too. But typically it's not. So I think that people will be very interested myself included in how meal timing relates to all of this. But yeah, let's. So how do you improve fat utilization? How do you improve carbohydrate utilization? Let's hammer both out really quickly. Enhancing fat utilization is as simple as doing a little bit of work in a either pre-fat and gested state. So anytime you ingest a nutrient prior to training, you're going to buy us towards that nutrient. Right, which is almost what we were talking about earlier. So if you want to guarantee you burn more fat, eat more fat prior to workout. Now you're not going to lose fat. But what you're what you're effectively signaling is we have an over abundance of this fuel preferentially target this fuel. Now the downside is that may actually hinder your performance. That's typically only a concern for people at a very high level. Fat is a slower fuel source. So if you're relying upon that, your top end is going to come down a little bit. And so you wouldn't want to do that strategy prior to race if it is a carbohydrate dependent race. Right. And in fact, we actually see long term adaptations that would suggest that. So the enzymes responsible for carbohydrate metabolism will down regulate. And so you get worse at that. So not not a great strategy there. Carbohydrate would be the opposite. So if you have carbohydrate prior to exercise, you're going to buy us more towards that. So a handful of things you can do. If you're total caloric intake is simply managed, that's going to take care of a lot of these problems. An appropriate eating strategy. So the types of food, the combinations of food. All of those things are going to make your post carbohydrate ingestion, bulk. A lot of the things can go away. So there's a little bit of physiology that has to be corrected for. So it's a little bit in one hand, you can go very deep here, right? So the real answer of how we would do this is if we see a scenario like that, we're going to do a whole set of analyses. We're going to go full labs, right? Probably extensive blood panel, urine, saliva, stool, even. And we're going to figure out where is that glucose dysregulation coming from. So a lot of people think like, oh, it's a metabolism issue. It might be. And also might just be a flag. That's something else is happening in the body. So we're going to actually work backwards a lot to try to figure out exactly why that's occurring. It may be as simple as, oh, you're eating a lot of your carbohydrates without any fiber or protein. And we know that that's important because those will actually blunt the glycemic index, like the rise in blood glucose. So it could be a simple thing of this like, oh, your combination of food is doing it. It's not the total amount. It may be something again more endogenous to the actual system. It could be a hereditary issue. It could be a breathing issue. There could be a number of things. So the way to get better at it is to simply train it. And specificities came here. So if you want to get better at managing your blood glucose throughout the day, so you're not feeling those things, it could be a fuel issue. But it could be a number of other things. And it's just hard to go into all of them within our time constraint. So the practical tool that I would say here is, if you want to get better at managing energy throughout the day, make sure that number one, your protein is stabilized, making sure number two, you're ingesting your food in the right combinations, ideally with some fiber and or some protein or both. That alone will help stabilize a lot of the problems. Then you need to train it high intensity. You want to get better at using carbohydrates as a fuel, train it higher intensity, and have carbohydrates right before the workout. We'll do that a lot if we see folks who are, I kind of walked you through the test of identifying if you're not very good at using fat as a fuel. The test for not being good at using carbohydrates as a fuel is both that eating test I talked about, as well as performance. If you're a very, very, very slow starter, it's just like really hard to get going, that generally indicates you might be in a situation where you're not very good at using carbohydrates as a fuel. So we're going to practice that. We're going to have a pre carbohydrate, pre-exercise carbohydrate meal, then we're going to do higher intensity stuff. Not the point of making you sick and digestive issues, all that stuff, but we want to get better at using carbohydrates as a fuel faster. If you want to get better at doing the opposite, then you do that opposite starter. Either again, using fat prior to the workout, knowing your peak performance is going to go down a little bit, but you're investing in adaptation. So it's not about that workout, it's about what's going to happen six, eight, ten weeks from now. Investment is the way I want to think about it. Or you could bring in some fasted training. And so I want to really make sure I clarify when we were talking about earlier, I'm not at all against fasted training. It's not, it works. It's just isn't required for fat loss. It isn't required for fat adaptation. It is a great option though, if you want. What I was hoping to do with that conversation, and maybe I didn't articulate that well, is to not restrict people, but is to open you up. And at least you have a lot of options. If you like to do fasted cardio, amazing. It is great. If you hate it, you don't have to. You can reach the same performance goals, the same physique goals, without ever doing it. If you love long duration study state stuff, it is great. If you hate it, there are other options, higher intensity stuff. Again, if we're just talking about fat loss. So, I hope now that that's a little clearer in terms of the same thing with nutrition. If you like higher carb, great. If you like lower carb, these are all great. You have options. And you don't have to fret so much over, oh my gosh, I have to do this thing a certain way, and I absolutely hate it. You don't have to worry about it. Hit those concepts, and you'll be fine. A few minutes ago, you mentioned that if we ingest a given macronutrient fat, then the body will preferentially use that fuel source. If you ingest carbohydrate, we'll use that fuel source. Is it always the case that the body uses the ingested macronutrient prior to using glycogen? I have to imagine it's using both. I mean, if I were to have some carbohydrate before doing any kind of training, the muscle still burned glycogen, right? Or do they have some way to register the amount of circulating carbohydrate that would allow, or available carbohydrate in the form of foodstuffs that would allow them to not tap into their own muscle fiber stores of glycogen? All right, so the way that we derive energy for exercise or basic maintenance, a little bit about cellular physiology. So you've got a couple of organelle instructors that we need to pay attention to. The first one is the nucleus. That's Hold your DNA. The second one is the mitochondria. And then everything outside of that, you've got all these other organelle that do a bunch of things like ribosomes for protein synthesis, et cetera, et cetera. All right, now, when you want to produce energy for exercise, anytime you hear the word anaerobic, you automatically understand we are meaning without oxygen. All right, great. That all happens in the cytoplasm. The cytoplasm is that space that is not the mitochondria, not the nucleus. So it's the space in between everything else. This is like jelly-like substance that sounds there. So anaerobic metabolism happens there every single aerobic metabolic process happens in the mitochondria. All right, why is that important? If I go to create cellular energy and I need it the fastest possible, I'm going to go for phosphocreative because it is stored directly in the cytoplasm. The stoichiometry is one to one there, which means for every mole of phosphocreative, I burn, I can create one ATP. It's one to one. It is incredibly fast, but it is very limited because think about it. How much of that could I possibly store in the small size of the cell? That's it. If I need energy past that point, now I'll start using muscle glycogen. Because that is also stored in the cytoplasm. So it is right there. The stoichiometry is not one to one. It's a little bit higher, probably like four to one. So for every molecule of glycogen, you burn, you're going to get something like four, yes, like some small number of ATP out of that, which is great. But again, you're running into a storage problem. How much can I possibly store inside a muscle cell? It is very, very fast, much more effective than phosphocreatine, but so there. If I then want to metabolize any form of fat, or if I want to complete the metabolization of carbohydrates, I have to start transferring into the mitochondria. Now, I start getting whole hosts of ATP. If you were to fully run through this thing, which I'll talk about a second, called the TCA cycle, a Krebs cycle, you'll get now something like 28 or 30 or 35 down to depending, ATP per. So the energetic output is much higher. Okay, so here's exactly what happens. And I'm going to walk you through this in the form of carbohydrate, and then I'll come backwards and go through fat. So remember, carbohydrate. It is one carbon molecule that has been hydrated. So it is one to one. So the actual chemistry here, it is C-H2O, one carbon, 28-1O. Glucose is a six carbon chain. So the chemistry here is C-6, H-12-O-6. Six carbon, six waters. Very simple. That's a carbohydrate. All right, so you can imagine if you're watching on the video here, you'll see my fingers going out, so I'll try to make sure I explain it to you. I'll just listen in an easy fashion. So you've got this chain of six carbons that is in front of you. And the very first step to metabolism is you snap that thing in half. So you break into two separate three carbon chains. All right, now in doing that, you got a little bit of energy because you broke that one bond, but not a tremendous amount. This is called glycovosis. So lysis being the split, you know, like, you split glycogen up. Got a little bit of energy of that. All right, you formed this three-color carbon chain called pyruvator, pyruvac acid. Okay, there's differences there, but don't kill me. General audience, friends. All right, I got to give this to everybody. So you got a little bit of that. Now you can't do much past that besides rip one more carbon off of each of those three carbon chains. So I've got two three carbon chains. I'd be careful how I do this with my fingers so I don't flip you off here in a second. But I burn one more off of each. I get a little bit of energy. And now that little two carbon chain, I have two two carbon chains. Those are called acetal cohe. All right, amazing. I have now completed an aerobic glycovosis. I've got really nothing left I can do here. I made a little bit of ATP. Now, wait a minute. I have now freed... two carbons. Because remember I started with six and I split them apart, but I didn't have two three carbon chains. I burned one each. I've got two free-floating carbons. I have to now do something with them. My body will not let me go through that last process unless I've got a plan for that free carbon because I can't break it in half. Amazing. Here's what's going to happen. If I have those three carbon molecules and I don't have anywhere I can put that carbon, you're not going to go through that process. It's going to stop it. You're going to start building up pyruvate. Now, at the same time, you're breaking ATP for fuel. That's called ATP hydrolysis. You have water that comes in, you have a dentine, and three phosphates. That's why it's called ATP. Dendritine triphosphate, one, two, three. You break one of those phosphates off. There you go. There's your energy. So now you have a free-floating inorganic phosphate and an adenosine dye phosphate. So two over there. Amazing. That actually results because you use water for it, results in a free-floating hydrogen ion. Does it have to trust me hydrogen H2O? Any idea what a free-floating hydrogen is? It's going to... That's acid. I was going to say it's going to increase acidity. For anyone that's ever measured pH, what you're really measuring is the amount of hydrogen. Potential hydrogen. That's what pH is, right? 100% are... There's two definitions of pH, but you get... That's one of the two. So are you going to tell me this is related to the burn? We're going to get close, right? So, I've got a bunch of free-floating. You got the phosphates, which are actually problem, to probably more of a problem than people realized. And that hydrogen. What are you going to do with that hydrogen? Well, one thing you can do is actually ship it over to pyruvate and bond it there. We have a special name for that little molecule. When you have pyruvate and you have a hydrogen attached to it, do you know what's called? Hydrogen peroxide. Lactate. Lactate, lactocacid. This is that whole system, right? Again, I'm skipping some steps, making a little bit of mistakes here, intentionally folks, just to make this assumed. So what happens when you start running a bunch of anaerobic like halosys? You start seeing massive rises in lactate. Cool. Not lactocacid. Right. Right. That's why we see associations between a lot of lactate and a lot of fatigue. But the lactate's actually not causing the fatigue. The lactate is actually sparing you from having a bunch of free-floating acid. It's also can be then used directly back in the muscle, because as soon as you bring in enough oxygen, and you can take that hydrogen back off of it, you've now turned it right back into pyruvate, and run it through this whole cycle as fuel that I'm about to do. You can actually actually ship it out of the exercising muscle, and ship it into a non-acercising muscle, and then go backwards and make glucose. What actually liberates hydrogen from lactate? You're like chemically? Yeah. So what liberates, what are the stimuli that can take hydrogen off the pyruvate? Yeah, oh yeah. And then in other words, to reduce lactate and free up that hydrogen. Oxygen availability. So in fact, one of the major places that you ship hydrogen to, or one of the major places that you ship lactate to is your heart. Because it's what we call the ultimate slow-touch fiber, and it has a ton of freely available mitochondria, which have a ton of access to oxygen, so it can actually then go to it, form water. The H2 will be used to form water, and now we have a place to store the hydrogen. All right. Cool. Cool. So as a result of anaerobic like halusis, we have made a little bit of ATP. We've created a lot of waste, and we don't have anywhere to go with these end products. So when you do anything of a higher intensity, and it says, I need energy fast, you're going to go to this system first, right? Right past ATP, because it is the fastest place to get energy, but you're not going to get much of it, and you've got to deal with the waste products. Boom. Right back to the beginning of our conversation. Endurance is about two things, energy production and waste management. And we're right, fatigue buffering. This is it, right? How well can you handle the elevations in hydrogen, right, drop in pH, and what are you going to do with these products? If you want to fully metabolize a carbohydrate, you then have to take something with those pyruvates or those acetylcoids, which are going to do, if oxygen is available, you will take those things and ship them into the mitochondria. They have to go through some cell walls and some other things like that, but they're going to get inside there. Once they're in there, that two carbon acetalcoate runs to this entire cycle that we call the crev cycle. That's this really interesting place. That's where B6 and NMN, people are like, that's where that whole stuff starts to kick, and all your B vitamins basically run that entire circle. And you're going to start off the top, you have a bunch of fun stuff going on, but as a part of that circle, you're going to pull off some hydrogen ions, you're going to send these to what's called the electron transport chain, that's where you're going to get a ton of ATP out of, and as a result, about halfway through the turn, you're going to pull off one carbon, and about halfway through the other, but almost the other way through the finish, you're going to pull off the second carbon. So you're going to take the second acetalcoate, run that entire thing, same through as well. And so what we did is we started off with a six carbon glucose chain. We split it in half, we call those pyruvates, made a little bit of energy because we broke that one bond of those two carbons that are in the middle. Cool. Those two, three carbon molecules, we pulled one carbon off of each, we brought in, sorry, we moved those into the mitochondria, we brought one off, we took a breath, brought in some oxygen, bonded that, took out two CO2 exhales. We ran the acetalcoate through the crev cycle, one, two carbons per turn, coming out as CO2, so we had six carbons total, and we started, the exited was zero carbons. Now we have fully metabolized a molecule of carbohydrate. That required an anaerobic start and an aerobic finish. If you don't have a lot of mitochondria, large mitochondria, high-functioning mitochondria, you're going to limit your anaerobic performance because you're going to get, you're going to run that door full very, very quickly. You can't go past it because hydrogen will build up way too fast, and one of the things that we know is, both temperature and pH, run enzyme function. So they're going to stop. You want to even be able to run through, in fact, that ATP hydrolysis phase, even if I gave you a whole infinite supply of ATP, if I put enough acid in there, it would stop working because the ATPase enzyme needed to split, won't be able to run in a highly acidic environment, or a hot environment. Yeah, at some point, perhaps today, perhaps in the future discussion, but still not too far from now, we could talk about the role of temperature in the, in pyruvate in terms of its regulation and muscle contraction. But I want to make sure I understood something correctly. You mentioned these two parallel fuel systems. One is essentially anaerobic, and the other is aerobic. You said that if we can't pull enough, if we can't break enough bonds, then we limit our anaerobic capacity. Correct. I would have thought, given that the mitochondria are the site for, essentially, for aerobic metabolism, that we would be limiting our aerobic capacity as well. Perhaps you could just clarify for me how these two things are divided, or is there not a clean division? Is it not an either? No, in fact, again, I think it's better to think of these things rather as two separate parallel things, as one big cycle. There are one gear turning the next. Being compromised in one will compromise the other. That, I should say, reminds me of what you said earlier, which is the bicycle gear analogy. That works great. So if you short-circuit one, basically the chain can't move. That's fantastic. Okay, so indeed they are running in parallel, but they are interdependent. Yeah, well, they're actually not even running in parallel because they're actually following to the same endpoint. Which is like, if you're going to come from the anaerobic glycolysis route, or you're going to come from the fat route, which I'll talk about in a second, they're both going to be limited in the mitochondria. So when that thing's full, it doesn't matter. You can't run either system. So it is more of like a, again, if you're running the bike gears, it doesn't really matter if the back one's larger or smaller because if either one is limited, your toast because they're running on the same system. You can sneak a little bit here and there, but not much. You also really nicely highlighted how lactate, this thing that we think of as a limiting factor, like the burn, it gets in the way, and it's the thing we need to stop and buffer and all sorts of things. Sure. It's actually really a fuel. It's a tremendously effective fuel. Yeah, is a strongly preferred fuel actually. Is this interesting? This is a very classic case of association, correlation versus causation. So the original actually, there's a really cool history on lactate, but it was originally found, I think in Germany, pardon my history, somewhere in Europe, and hunted stags. So one of the things is they sort of realized is if we harvested a stag in a resistate when it didn't know what we were there, versus if we chased it and it was ran down, that these lactate concentrations were significantly higher in the latter situation. Therefore, lactate started immediately getting this association between high fatigue points, and it is easy to measure. If you're doing any sort of lactate test, any sort of metabolic test, you will see as fatigue increases, lactate will also increase. The assumption there was then, oh my gosh, it's the cause. Now we know, like, again, it's not the thing, it's in large part trying to buffer the negative consequences of ATP hydrolysis and some other things. So it is certainly playing a part in that role, but it is not a core driver. It's also why you don't need to worry about doing things to, quote-unquote, reduce lactate in the muscle after exercise, or to clear lactate, or any of those things. You may still want to do those activities, but not for that reason. Lactate is fine. You're actually going to use it, and again, the neighboring exercise muscle fibers in the same muscle. Another muscle, you can send it actually to the liver, and it can actually go through gluconeogenesis, and it can actually replenish liver glycogen. Just as I feel sore, or you can send the harder any number of sources. You can also just kind of put it in circulation, put it back in the muscle, and once enough oxygen is there, you can just kick it right back into either glucose or glycogen. It's totally fine. So it is obviously clear, though. Once that number gets very, very high, other things are going to be happening that are causing a lot of hurt. And this is your managing waste, right? It is really an issue of managing what am I going to do with all this extra carbon? What am I going to do with all this extra intergenic phosphate, and some other nasty bioproducts? But that's the thing you have to deal with. I'd love for you to teach me how different ratios of fuel sources are used, depending on how long I happen to be exercising. For example, if I do a very short bout of exercise, typically, that's correlated with a higher intensity output. I suppose I could jog for one minute, but here I'm thinking about sprinting for one minute. Or less, which fuels are used? Is that mainly driven by fat, stores by carbohydrate stores? Is it driven by dietary fat, preferentially, or carbohydrate that I've ingested if indeed I've ingested those, or protein for that matter? And then as we transition to exercise that goes a little bit longer, anywhere from three to five minutes, how do those ratios change? And as we transition to longer duration, what most people think of as endurance exercise, but long duration output of, you know, 20 minutes or more leading all the way up to full marathon, how does that change the ratio of fuel sources that are used? And I'd be particularly interested in distinguishing between carbohydrate, fat, and protein that's ingested, so coming from food sources, or carbohydrate, fat, and protein that are coming from storage sites within the body. Okay, great. Let's start at zero seconds and run all the way through marathon. And we'll flag the distinctions where they start changing. As soon as you want us to create muscle contraction and power, the very first source of energy is fossil creating. That's going to power you for zero to maybe say eight to 15, 20 seconds of maximal exertion. And that's in coming from the muscle fibers themselves. Yeah, that is actually stored in the, what's called the cytoplasm. So this is a little area or space in the muscle fiber that's sort of like in this jelly-like substance. And it's nice because one molecule of fossil creating gives you one molecule of ATP. So it's not a big energy output, but it's very fast because it is stored right there in the local exercising muscle. Right now, if you need energy past that point, say, you know, 10 or 15 seconds up to maybe a couple of minutes, this is now you're going to have to transition because you're going to burn through that fossil creating and you're going to be out. You're going to have to move to now carbohydrate metabolism. This is what we call anaerobic glycolysis. So there's two phases of glycolysis. Now glycolysis itself means glucose burning. All right, so just means we're using carbohydrate as a fuel source. So initially, when we start off this cascade, which is going to take us again for a couple of minutes, carbohydrate utilization comes first from the exercising muscle. So it's very similar to fossil creating that way. If you start running low on it, you can actually start pulling blood glucose. And if blood glucose gets low, you'll have to start getting glycogen from the liver to keep that up. And we've sort of covered that conversation. All right, so a little bit of chemistry here. Just give me a little bit of room here. So now, remember, a carbohydrate is a carbon molecule that has been hydrated. So one carbon attached to one water. And remember, water is H2O. Most of the time we're talking about glucose, it is in a six carbon chain. So six carbons attached to six water molecules. All right, great. When I go to split this up through anaerobic glycoliclysis, it works a little bit like this. So you've got this six carbon chain. The first step is to snap that thing in half. You're going to make two three carbon chains. Now, we broke one bond right there, so we got a little bit of energy, but not a tremendous amount. At the end of anaerobic glycoliclysis, you're going to net something like three or four ATP. So more than you get from the fossil creations, it's quite droopable, but still not very much. There's another major downside that's coming in a second to this system. The upside is it's fast. Now, why don't actually one adaptation we get to training in this style? Is you'll increase your ability to store glycogen in your muscle. Which is great, right? We can actually biopsy you and measure the amount that you store, and a training adaptation is awesome. So you're able to sustain this system longer. So perhaps 90 seconds into your interval training, you hit a fatigue point, and now you maybe can extend that to 100 or 115 seconds simply because you're storing more glycogen in the muscle. Before we have to end then go into the blood and get in the form of glucose. So that's great. So we've got this six carbon molecule, and we split this in half. We got that little bit of ATP. And now we're in this little tricky position, because this three carbon molecule is what we call pyruvate, pyruvate, pyruvate acid. And again, chemistry folks, I'm skipping some steps. I'm going to intentionally make some mistakes here. I'm making sure the entire world listening regardless of where they come in can follow me here. Okay? So don't burn me on the details. Right. You've got this pyruvate. The problem is you can no longer do anything with that. Like all this is over. You've got to make a choice. Right. In order to make something out of those three carbon molecules, you've got to ship them to the mitochondria. As you said, that is the only place of aerobic metabolism. Right. We cannot do aerobic metabolism anywhere else until we enter the mitochondria. So anytime we cross that barrier, we know we've automatically switched from an aerobic to a aerobic. Well, here's the problem. If you were to take one more carbon off that three carbon pyruvate, you have to now do something with that carbon waste. Okay. So before when we split the six carbon chain, we didn't actually leave any carbons free floating. We just split a two molecule in half. When we go to split from pyruvate and make it into this two carbon molecule, called acetil CoA or a seal CoA, now we've got a free floating carbon. We have to have a strategy to do that because that's going to increase the acidity level. Any enzyme in our body that works to create fuel is very pH sensitive. Right. So if this thing, if pH gets off either high or low, these enzymes can't work. And that's really, really important because even if I were to give you a direct injection of ATP, remember that's that energy currency. That's the only way we can actually form energy. I guess I'm able to clarify, anytime we're using phosphocrytine or glucose or fat, which we'll get to a second, we're not actually getting energy for exercise by breaking those down. We're getting energy that we can use to then make ATP. We break that ATP down. That's what's actually powering muscle contraction. You can go back to our previous episode where we walked you through the detail of the muscle contraction. But that's what we're after, okay? So in the case of pyruvate, if we split that off, we have got to deal with that. And the only way, and the best way we can deal with that is oxygen. Remember, we're going to breathe in O2. That O2 is going to combine with that free floating carbon, makes CO2. We're going to exhale that thing out. That's our waste management strategy. But that has to happen in the mitochondria. Remember, if we're using oxygen, it has to be in the mitochondria. So if we have the ability to ship pyruvate into the mitochondria, or golden, but what happens if we don't? Why do we not? Well, if we don't have enough mitochondria, or our mitochondria are too small, or they're too far away, or we don't have sufficient oxygen availability. Why don't we have sufficient oxygen availability? Because we created the pyruvate too fast. And the demand in the mitochondria is exceeded by the buildup of pyruvate. And so now we're having this giant backlog, and this thing fills up fast. We have a couple of strategies here. Well, when you're going through ATP, and you're splitting, it's called ATP hydrolysis. And I'm doing that. Remember, ATP is a dentistsine molecule, and then the tea part is triphosphate, one, two, three, which means you have three phosphates attached at the end. When you break that phosphate off, you get to get your energy. So now you have an intergalactic phosphate, and an ADP, a dentistsine dye phosphate, two. That process requires water, it's called hydrolysis. As a result of that, you then have a free floating hydrogen. And as you will know, that is acid. That's potential hydrogen. That's what that means. And so you've increased the acidity in the muscle by breaking up all this ATP. And so, uh-oh, we're building up acid. We have building up pyruvate. We don't have nowhere to go with it. And we can't cleave off a carbon, because now we're just going to exacerbate the acid increase. So what we can do is we can take those hydrogens that we're building up and store them on the pyruvate. A pyruvate that's holding an extra acid has a special name, and we call that lactate. All right? So that's why we see this buildup of lactate. So one of the downsides of anaerobic eye causes an incredibly high rate of waste production. Now lactate is not the cause of fatigue. In fact, if you think a little bit more carefully about what I just said, it's actually stopping you. It's what we call a acid buffer. You can actually use it for a bunch of everything. You can ship it to a neighboring muscle fiber. And the same muscle that's not working. You can ship it to the liver. You can ship it to the heart in a bunch of other places. And then you can actually just work backwards. For example, the heart, and it's got a bunch of mitochondria that are free, you can bring in the oxygen, attach it to that hydrogen, make water, and now you're right back to pyruvate. You put two pyruvate back together, and now you just make glucose. So you can actually store it in the liver. This is a good process called gluconeogenesis through this fancy thing called the Chorey cycle, which is what the proper cycle here is. So you can use it as a very potent fuel source. In fact, lactate is a tremendously valuable fuel source. I'm not only for exercise, but for cognition and a bunch of other things. So lactate, in fact, this is why, if you've seen any of the research about pre-exam testing, exercise, you'll see a noticeable increase in exam scores if you do a 20-minute-about-of-exercise prior to taking the exam. And it's largely in part probably because of things like elevations in lactate. How intense of exercise would be most beneficial? I don't know that exact answer. I just know that generally any form of exercise is good, but if you were to reach a reasonably high heart rate, you're probably going to see something. In fact, there's an acute and chronic adaptation here. So folks that exercise have better memory retention, score, and so on, and so on, etc. But then also doing it prior to that exam, make sure you're recovered and rested back down the straight, but you'll generally perform better. Previous guests on the human lab podcast, who's a psychology professor and neuroscientist and also dean of College of Arts and Sciences at New York University, NYU, Wendy Suzuki, is religious about daily morning exercise, specifically for this purpose of enhancing learning and memory and has a lot of really beautiful data. I consider one of the real pioneers in this space. So if people want to learn more, they can look to that episode or Wendy's work. We can provide a link to a couple of the papers. But this is fantastic in that it's incredibly clear. I think for the first time, I'm understanding what lactate is really doing. And it's dispelling a lot of myths that I think I and a lot of other people arrive to the discussion about lactate with. What happens when the bout of exercise extends longer? Amazing. So if we want to continue past that point, we have to have some sort of strategy to get through it. We're stuck. We're out of gas. We have to then ship it to the mitochondria. And now we're going to enter what's called a Robic glycolysis. And this is going to take us anywhere from, again, say that 90 seconds of all that work, up to really 20, 30 minutes. In fact, it really will take us to unlimited. If you look at a highly competitive marathon runner, even those that are running say you're two hour marathon, those folks are burning up to 80% carbohydrate. It is not a fat burning thing. And the reason is fat metabolism is way too slow. It provides a lot of energy, but it is incredibly slow. If you're trying to run a four and a half or so minute mile, repeated 26 times, you have to be moving fast. Are they ingesting carbohydrate as a fuel source during the race? Unless you're on the team, you don't know. They won't really tell you these sort of trade secrets. It would be, I would say, fairly rare to not have something. There's a bunch of different strategies. If you're going to be able to do that, there's a bunch of different strategies. If you're going to go really long, like some of these, like cycling, where the races will be several hours, then you actually might go to some fat as fuel sources. I know a lot of cyclists are using ketones and things like that. Now, but traditionally, most endurance folks are going to buy us heavily towards carbohydrate. Now, in one respect, you're not going to run out of carbohydrates until you're many hours in. These folks are a unique case. But the average individual who's doing an hour, hour and a half cardio, even, you're not going to be limited by your carbohydrate stores. You're going to be just fine. You're going to be limited by some other things, which will maybe sort of break down here in a second. But you're going to be fine there. A lot of those folks will take carbohydrate though at very specific intervals. You do want to be careful, though, of ingesting too many fast carbohydrates prior to your exercise spell. We actually have this little thing that's called the insulin glucose double amy. What that means is when you ingest carbohydrates, immediately your blood glucose goes up, and that's depending on the type of carbohydrate and things like that. Well, the same thing happens with exercise. And so what happens is insulin wants to start pulling glucose out of the blood. At the same time, muscle wants to start pulling glucose out of the blood. And so we have this giant bolus of carbohydrate come in and then all of a sudden our blood sugar crashes. And so if you're going to be doing so, you're your first half marathon or something like that. And you're in those giant corals where there's like, you know, 100 people waiting to go in your standing for 45 minutes. You may or may not want to slow down like three or four bananas in a bagel and honey and like you probably don't need that. Now, not everyone experiences this double amy, but it has been shown in the literature to happen to some people. So you want to just be a little bit careful. An easy way to combat that is just practice. Exactly what you're going to do in your race and your training. That's like the simplest advice ever, but you'd be stunned how many people do things during the race that they've actually never done in training. I suggest people do exactly what you describe also for any kind of cognitive testing. Of course. Before a big exam is not the time to discover whether or not you can handle twice as much as press O or take a new tropic for the first time or. No. Or change anything. I mean, if indeed the score on that exam is meaningful to you, keep things regular. So to recap what we've done here is we started off in the side of plasm with this glucose molecule that is six carbons. We took that thing, we split it in half. We called that thing anaerobic like all this is we made a little bit of energy, but not much. We take those three carbon molecules, we ship them into the mitochondria. We take each one of those, we clear off one carbon each. Those carbons, we take a breath in, we attach them to oxygen, we exhale them, get rid of that energy. We are now fully into aerobic glycolysis. Each one of those two carbon molecules we run through the Krebs cycle, each round of the Krebs cycle burns one, two carbons. So we go one, two, one, two. And now we've gone from six carbon molecule all the way down to zero. We used the hydrogens that we pulled off of that Krebs cycle run to go to the electron transport chain. From there, we made a whole bunch of ATP. And so we have now fully metabolized one molecule of carbohydrate. And the end product of all of it is simply ATP, water, and CO2. Beautiful. And leads me to the conclusion that most everything is really about utilization of carbons and exhaling CO2. Is that how I should think about book ending, what you just described? This is why we started off the conversation with the circle of life. This is really a carbon gain. This is why we call chemistry with carbon organic chemistry. That's what the whole thing is about. Any leaving being has to run through metabolism. It's all a carbon gain. Any leaving being has to use ATP. This is all just a big fancy game. How do I make ATP and handle the waste? Remember, endurance is all about waste management, fatigue resistance, the same thing, and energy production. We're playing a game here. The whole game, bring in energy, use it, mitigate waste products. So when thinking about aerobic exercise or long duration exercise, in this case anything longer than five minutes for that matter, five minutes all the way up to an ultra marathon, the breathing associated with endurance exercise, the heart beating, which of course is associated with the breathing invoice. Versa, it's really all about bringing oxygen into the system that then allows those carbons to be used and within the mitochondria specifically, and then carbon dioxide to be exhaled as we work through the carbons of the sort of beads on a string. Is that right? Unless you're moving incredibly fast for a very long time and we're talking probably north of 90 minutes, endurance is really not a game of making sure I have enough fuel. It is simply managing the waste production. And that's exactly what you described. You need to bring in the oxygen so you can handle the carbon that's building up as a result of both the anaerobic, anaerobic glycolysis. That's our game here. If we start talking about endurance events longer than that, now we do have to start worrying about running out of muscle glycogen, running out of liver glycogen, et cetera, or if we are at that two hour marker zone, we're moving very, very, very, very fast. But anything south of that is just managing carbon buildup and we do that best through oxygen utilization or getting more efficient and having a higher capacity for our anaerobic side. So we can do that by having either more glycogen in our muscle, so that lasts longer, or building better acid buffering systems. And there's a whole line of supplementation that are specifically acid buffers, as a whole line of training, as a whole line of breathing, to manage this step. So we have a lot of strategies where we can maximize endurance. All we have to do is go back to the earlier part of our talk, which is figure out what's the actual limiting step and then train according to that, or do your strategy, your nutrition, your supplementation that defeats that limiting factor. For an example, if you are trying to maximize your performance in this 20 second maximal burst, and your strategy for that was to make sure that your muscle glycogen is saturated, it's probably not going to help it done, because you're not going to be limited by total fuel. You're going to be limited by your ability to buffer acid. However, storing more glycogen in your muscle and preparation for a marathon is a tremendously effective strategy because that will become a limiting factor. So what we can do, actually, next, if you'd like, is we can just walk through these and look at the individual limitations where the failure point happens, and then that effectively will outline your strategy for improving them. So you taught us about carbohydrate utilization as a fuel source. What about fat and what about protein? Great. I'll start with protein because it's easy. It is generally at best going to represent 10% of your energy output. Now, that will grow over time in terms of if you did a several hour about a vector size. When you started doing it, you might be using 5% of your energy from protein and then that microd 10 or so. And that happens because you start running low on muscle glycogen. You start running low on liver glycogen. You start then having to pull in energy from another place. So like as those numbers go down, you'll see an increased uptick of energy from fat, as well as protein. Having said that, it's not a tremendous fuel source. It is only a rubric. So it has to be oxidized. Those are the same thing. When I say oxidized, you use oxygen to burn something to make a fuel. So it's not a significant contributor to energy in that regard. And unless you're talking ultra-marathons or longer, and it is also not something that can enhance performance. And so we don't really need to talk much more about it than that. In terms of fat as a fuel source, now here's the fundamental difference. While carbohydrate starts anaerobically and finishes aerobically in the mitochondria, you're using mostly the carbohydrate in the exercising muscle tissue. Eventually you can pull from blood and then you can pull from the liver. With fat, you have a tiny amount stored in the muscle, intra-muscular triglycerides. But the overwhelming majority of fuel you get from fat comes systemically. And so now we have a fundamental difference. We actually literally have a time problem. I can get energy from carbohydrates faster because it is directly there. If I go to pull it from fat, I've got to pull it from the rest of the body. Which is why somebody who loses fat loses it from their entire body. Despite the fact that they may be only exercising a couple of parts. So think about a runner, someone who lost a lot of fat, running. You don't see them just lose fat in their legs. It comes from their face and their neck and everywhere. Why? Because what you're going to do is pull fat from the entire system. You're going to break it down through a process called life polices. Which means you break it down from the stored form. You put it in the blood as that glycerol, back bone, which is that three carbon backbone, and the individual fatty acids. It's going to float through the blood. There's a seven step system here, but we'll skip it for now. It's going to have to get then up taken into the muscle. It's going to be taken up and run into the mitochondria. Now, that backbone, that three carbon glycerol backbone, is actually going to function almost exactly like the three carbon pyruvate. Just get it into the mitochondria, clear off one carbon, run it as that stuccoate, bottoming, but a bone. Exactly. Same thing. Super easy to metabolize. Small enough to go through the mitochondria membrane. The fatty acid change becomes a problem. So if you have a chain that's longer than are eight or so carbons. It has to actually go through a special transporter on the cell wall to get in. That's going to be limited by a thing called carnitine. You're probably familiar with that as a supplement. You may have talked about that. There's a lot of places that make it. That's going to be limiting factor. If it is a smaller, what we call a short chain, or even a medium chain, which a lot of folks have heard of MCT, that's what we're talking about. That can actually go directly through, because it's small enough to pass through, because it immediately is an air resource. In either case, the way that you finally metabolize a fatty acid is a process where you would go through and cut off two carbons at a time. Why would you cut off two? Because you're trying to make that two carbon acids in a cowayse. You can run through that Krebs cycle again. Because you're cutting off two carbons at a time, we have a special name for that oxidation process. It's called beta oxidation. That's exactly what we call it, beta oxidation. Two carbons in. You cut it off to make that acid to a cowayse. So you can notice the oxidation passway, the electron transport pathway, is identical, whether you're talking about the carbohydrates or the fat. In fact, it doesn't even matter. More to our point, if we're talking about simply fat loss, it really just is about running that electron transport chain, whether it came from a carbohydrate original source, or a fat original source. It ends up in the mitochondria as basically the exact same thing. It then ends the end of metabolism as the same thing. Remember, the final endpoint of carbohydrate metabolism is water, ATP, and CO2. Do you want to guess the final endpoint of fat metabolism? It's water, ATP, and CO2. So practical applications here. If you want to maximize fat loss, what type of training is best? It really doesn't matter. If you enjoy longer steady-state stuff, fantastic. If you enjoy intervals, amazing. If you would like to do a combination, that's my personal preference. That's great too. You have a ton of options. Pick what you think is a combination of challenging. Not all exercise should be easy, but you will actually enjoy somewhat, or you're willing to accept. Anything that you absolutely hate, don't do it. Sometimes it is very, very, very difficult to do high intensity training. You have to really be interested in doing it. If not, it ends up turning into like moderate intensity training. You sort of just check the box, and it doesn't work that well if you're just checking the box. So if you're like, man, mentally, I don't have it in me today. To get to a high heart rate and throw up and all that stuff. Cool, but you can just get to some moderate steady-state stuff. Well, that's a win. Great. If you're like, oh my gosh, more than 10 straight minutes, and I'm so bored. And maybe you're also like, I don't have 45 minutes. I got to get this done in eight minutes. Great. Go to some high intensity intervals. Either option will be equally effective. As you mentioned earlier, exercise is useful for aesthetic changes, functionality, and for longevity. But when thinking about exercise specifically for fat loss, I do have to ask this question. I often hear from people that they prefer one type of exercise versus another for sake of fat loss, because certain forms of exercise make them very hungry. I'm wondering whether or not there's any relationship between the intensity or type of exercise and the hunger stimulus. Now, I don't have this problem because basically everything makes me hungry. And yet, I'm also okay fasting for part of the day. I'm one of those pseudo intermittent fasters. Talk about what I mean by that. I just have an E between 11 a.m. and 8 p.m. naturally. I'm not religious about it, but I don't do it for any other reason, except that that tends to be when I'm hungry and exercise outside of that in the morning, typically. In any case, is there a way that people can determine what type of exercise might be better worse for them based on its appetite, stimulating or inhibiting effects? Because I also hear that some people will go for a long run and then they are going to go not hungry for several hours afterwards. Does that have anything to do with which fuels are being utilized during different forms of exercise? That's actually a really good question. I don't know the mechanisms that could explain that answer. What I can tell you is you're the same comment for physical activity. In other words, people say, man, if I do this type of training, then I just am exhausted and I lay around the rest of the day. So my total cloric expenditure is actually compromised as an aggregate because I'm down. The data would suggest in general that doesn't happen. So most of the time we don't see a reduction in physical activity with either high intensity or steady state training. In fact, you generally see equal if not increased, what's called need. So it's the non-exercising part of your day in addition to the basal metabolic rate. So physical activity wise, you don't want to send it to be proper. Now hunger is a little bit of a different thing. The answer here is, I don't think we have time to actually do justice on this. So perhaps best to not get into this one. Yeah, why don't we punt this down the road to our discussion about nutrition specifically and we've backed it. So we'll ear market for that. Meanwhile, it sounds like if one is thinking purely in terms of burning calories and getting the health benefits of exercise to create a cloric deficit to create fat loss. It doesn't matter whether or not they burn those calories using a form of exercise that relies predominantly on carbohydrate fat or protein. Correct? It's not that it doesn't matter. It's that either one will work. Because when we say things like that, it doesn't mean they're actually identical. There are some slight differences and maybe those differences are important for some people and not others. I'd say it's either one is a viable strategy. Great. What about protein as a fuel? As an actual fuel. So here, let me give you an analogy. Imagine that you were with me a few weeks ago in southern Montana and we were out in the wilderness for a week. And it's cold out there and you needed to make a fire. And if I said, look, you can pick any of these things. There are some wood over there. We brought some newspaper and then we brought a match and we needed to create a fire. I'm going to use that fire to energy and heat up. Okay, I said great. The very first place you would probably start to make that fire is the match. You like the match and any match. Hey, it's going to light immediately, but it's probably going to last five to twenty seconds. I don't know before it burns out. That's phosphocreating. Real fast, real burns out. If you were smart, you would take that match and then light the newspaper on fire. Right? Now, if you were to burn a whole newspaper, it is more energy than you get to the match. But you still, you know, I don't know what's going to take a few minutes, some number of minutes before an entire newspaper burns up. I don't know, right? Depends on then. Yeah. Which type of newspaper is I guess? Right? Amazing. That's carbohydrate. Right? If you were really smart, you would use that to then light a piece of wood on fire and a wood, if you've been on the wilderness, it could last hours. Days, it's really quite unlimited. Your phosphocreating storage is very limited, small. Glikagen is a lot higher because you can store it in muscle. You can store it in other places. So you have more, but not a lot. Fat is unlimited. The average person, if you're around to say 70 kilos, up 170 pounds or so. And you're moderately lean, maybe 15% body fat, nothing crazy. You probably have enough stored fat to create enough energy just to survive for more than 30 days. Right? This would literally be, if you ingested zero calories, you have a enough fuel in your stored fat to keep you alive for certainly 30 days. You wouldn't feel good and all those things. Energetically, basically fat will never, ever be your limiting factor performance. So when we start talking about what limits my performance in these areas, you can just wipe fat off the list. It will never be your limiting factor to any type of endurance performance. You simply have way too much. The only problem with that is it's just too slow. I've got to mobilize it. I've got to get in the blood, move it that whole thing too slow. So if I want to go faster, I will never be able to fully utilize fat, which is why we talked about earlier. You'll never see a situation in which somebody is 100% burning fat as a fuel and no percent carbohydrate. It's always going to be too slow. Highest you'll get maybe 70, so percent protein in this equation is none of that. Now you may notice, how do you make paper? What's the fiber you combine with water that it gets pressed, it gets compressed. Yeah, it's made from wood. How do you make a match? It's made from wood. What's carbohydrate, a chain of carbon? What's fat, a chain of carbon? These are similar molecules, right? They're meant to give you pros and cons. It's very difficult to just light a log on fire without a lot of work you have to burn, burn, burn, burn, burn. So these are complementary systems that are really close to the same thing. Protein is none of those things. Protein is more like a piece of metal. So if you were out in the woods with me and we were trying to make a fire and you're like, hey, look, I found some old real road over there. Let's throw that on there. I would probably look at you like you're raising up technically. Can you melt metal? Sure, but you're going to burn a lot of energy to try to get a little bit back out of the metal. And now you've also cost yourself a very, very valuable structure. So protein is a fuel source for exercise or metabolism. It's just an incredibly poor choice. Your body will do it. Again, maybe five to 10%. But you now you're burning a very valuable supply in a situation in which you don't know where there's ever going to be anymore. Remember, protein is fairly transient. It's not very good at storing it. You can store a ton of carbohydrate and an unlimited literally amount of fat. So you just really need to disregard thinking about protein as a fuel source. Your body does not want to do it. You're not good at it. You can go through a process of gluconeogenesis from protein. Make glucose from it. It's just very poor. You're not going to get much out of the exchange. And you've burned your supply of metal, which is going to be very difficult. It's a very high commodity in the woods or the wilderness to have something like metal. For people that consume very low carbohydrate or zero carbohydrate diets, are they pulling more energy from muscle? Which I imagine is a conversion of amino acids into ready carbon chains. Yeah. I mean, in this particular case, once you've reached a certain level of adaptation, you've just gotten extremely good at generating glucose from other fashions. So you can bias heavily towards fat adaptation. The downside is, and we've seen this born in literature, you're going to perform slower. So if you don't care about maximizing performance, especially over something where it is a maximal effort for a few minutes or something, then maybe you're not concerned. And that's absolutely great, especially for people just don't exercise. Then hey, geez, very little concern here. But if you're interested in your performance and you're wondering why you're just like slugging it down, well, what you've done is you've down-regulated the ability, literally the enzymes responsible for that entire anaerobic glycolysis portion, they get down-regulated, which means there's not as much around anymore. And so you get really bad and slow at using carbohydrates as a fuel source. So is it very poor strategy for people on an anaerobic-based sport, or who like that type of activity? Can if you don't care, no problem. If you don't exercise at all, then you really have no problem there, which is actually why a high-fat low carbohydrate nutrition strategy for people who don't do much physical activity is probably like very effective. It is a really good strategy for weight management, for energy stabilization throughout the day, and the research would very much support that. In my observation, I would agree. I've tried low carbohydrate diets of severely limiting or completely eliminating carbohydrate. And after about two or three days, I feel pretty lousy, but mostly because I want to train very intensely in the gym. In addition to doing longer runs, I tend to do all of those things across the week. But I've also observed, and in fact, no several people that love the very low carbohydrate, aka ketogenic type diet. They're not doing ketogenic diets for mental health reasons per se, but indeed those people tend to do very limited exercise, or they tend to do a lot of long endurance, but low intensity long endurance. These are the, I walk to get my exercise types, and they do indeed walk a lot. And some of them manage to control their weight very readily, and like that diet for that reason, when we had Lane Norton on the podcast, he pointed out quite aptly that in order to lose weight, you have to restrict something either. Of course. Time or macronutrients, etc., to arrive at that subchloric threshold. Get below the sub maintenance threshold. I guess one of the things I want to point out is, this should be used received as, again, not a, this is better or worse. This is just, you now have a ton of options. So whatever personal preference, other factors, you get to craft this strategy of performance, aesthetics, and health, based on your personal preferences. At this point, I'd like to go back to our classic list of nine adaptations that exercise can induce. The first four, of course, being largely, largely unrelated to today's conversation, but that were covered in the episode that we did on strength, speed, and hypertrophy. So just to remind people, the nine adaptations are number one skill and technique, two speed, three power, which is speed times force, four strength, and five hypertrophy. Today, we're talking about the remaining adaptations on that list, starting with muscular endurance, followed by anaerobic capacity, followed by maximal aerobic output, and finishing at number nine with long duration exercise. So if we could start with muscular endurance, this would be number six on the list of nine adaptations, muscular endurance. How do I build muscular endurance? Why should I build muscular endurance? And just to remind me, what fuel sources are predominating when I'm training for muscular endurance? Great. So remember, muscular endurance is something that's going to be generally in a local muscle. It is not a cardiovascular or systemic issue, and it tends to be something in the neighborhood of, say, five to maybe even up to 50 repetitions. So this is the classic example we'll give you here is how many pushups can you do in a row? Most people are going to land somewhere in that range. I just said, how many sit-ups can you do in a minute? How many pull-ups? How long can you hang on a bar as a dead hang? Things like that. That's muscular endurance. Muscular endurance is not a mild run or a marathon or anything like that. So how long can I stand without breaking posture? This is muscular endurance. A plank, a wall sit. Great. Yes. Love all these things. Now, the reason I took you on that big, long metabolism journey is so I could help you understand exactly how to train this factor or any of these factors with a more comprehensive understanding what's happening. Meaning, thinking back to the metabolism, if I'm going to ask my triceps to do 50 pushups in a row, what's going to be my limiting factor? Am I going to run out of fat? No chance. Am I going to run out of glycogen? No chance. That's way too few of repetitions. You have a lot left there. So what's going to be the thing that stops me from getting 51 repetitions? Either you're going to have too high of a pH rise, so too much acid build up or you're going to have a problem clearing the waste. So really this is two factors dealing with acid build up and getting acid out of the muscle tissue and in the circulation because you have plenty of ability to handle that small amount of acid build up in your entire body. It's just you can't handle it in that tiny spot. Now I picked the tricep for a very specific reason. You're going to deal with more pain when you use a large muscle group like your quads or your glutes and you are with a small muscle group. For example, nobody ever threw up after arm day. But a lot of people throw up after leg day. Why is that? Look at the total amount of waste that you're dumping into your system when you have quadrupled or 10X the muscle size. Small muscle groups are only really going to be challenged in that local area. Large ones will dump so much waste into the system that you'll want to avoid that as quickly as possible. And that's one of the reasons why you throw up after hard exercise. Great. So the reason I'm laughing because I don't think I've ever thrown up from a weight training session. And so it's making me wonder if I've ever trained that hard. I've received or obtained the progress that I want to do generally over time, not every week, every workout every month. But certainly over the 30 plus years that I've been weight training, I've achieved the results I've wanted. I have, however, vomited after a long run when I didn't hydrate well. Sure. Sure. Too much water. Yeah. You'll get that out quick. Right. I just want to be clear because I think some people are getting the picture that if they're not vomiting, after their leg workout that they're not training according to your standards. Again, by the way, Dr. Andy Galbin runs experiments in his lab. He's recruiting subjects. Also known as my graduate students. That's right. In a event. Sorry to interrupt, but I felt it was a necessary interruption. So muscular endurance. There's plenty of fuel. Plenty of fuel you manage acid build up and you also need to get that fuel out of you. That's going to be a capitalization issue. So the way that we can think about this is capillaries surround your muscle and the whole point of them is so that blood can come into them. They hit this capitalization that actually slows the diffusion rate of blood down. And so you can exchange nutrients in and get waste products out. And then we get things back in a circulation. So the more of those you have, the better you are at dispersing any of these waste products build up, whether it's CO2 or the acid. So the adaptation you're looking for here is an increase in capitalization potentially a slight increase in myocondria, but the time is too fast. So we're going to be able to do these 50 repetitions and say under a minute or something like that. So getting the mobilization into the mitochondria, getting fuel that way too slow. That's not really going to get our performance here. So what are strategies to increase acid buffering ability and then capitalization. So on the capitalization side, you simply need to train at that ability. So you go close to failure and practice that often. That alone will increase, increase blood flow to that local area, which will take you through your process of increase in capitalization. Easy peasy specificity. Just to briefly interrupt. I find it remarkable, although not surprising, giving how amazing the human body is that simply by doing some movement repeat like a wall sit or a push ups or dips for that matter repeatedly over and over and over until you reach that failure point. Yep. Or that quaking point in the case of a wall sit that provides a stimulus for more capillaries to be built into the system. Literally the production or the trafficking of endothelial cells which make up the capillaries and allow basically more little pipes to feed the system with oxygen and remove waste products. It's like irrigation, right? Imagine you had a giant field and you had two big pipes running down the outside. Well, in fact, if you want to make sure water gets even the spruce grass in entire field, you'll have a bunch of offshooting little pipes. And the more those you have, the more coverage you get. Do we know what the specific signal is that says, hey, I failed at this. We need more capillaries. I actually don't know what that is. I could I would speculate it's a combination of acidity. As well as carbon dioxide and probably some nitric oxide stuff happening there, but I actually don't know. I'm guessing nobody knows for sure because we still don't know, for instance, what the exact signal is for hypertrophy. It's kind of an amazing situation. We know the requirements for getting the result we want. Yeah. But we still don't know what the specific signal is. In any event, what I'm hearing is building more capillaries is great for enhancing muscular endurance. And the way to get more capillaries into those muscles is to train for muscular endurance. By getting close to failure or to some point where you simply can't continue for whatever reason. Could you give us an example of what a reasonable training protocol might be in terms of the classic galpin list now. Yeah. Exercise choice. Maybe a few options order volume and frequency. Great. What should we be doing? How often should we be doing it? And, you know, for instance, I do wall sits to failure and pushups to failure. Given that this is a local process, I'm guessing that if I do pushups to failure, I'm not going to increase the number of capillaries in my legs very much. Correct. So you nailed it. Exercise choice is high precision here. So pick the muscle group and the exact sequencing and movement pattern you want. High precision. This is the thing. If you want to get better to plank, hold a plank. You want to do more pushups, two more pushups. You can do some other stuff. That's complimentary. But really this is a high precision game. Do the exact same thing for exercise choice. Very simple there. Okay. In terms of exercise order, I suppose this dovetails with volume. Yeah. Can I combine training? Let's say wall sits for my quads and, you know, nearby muscle groups and then do pushups to failure. And then also do some sort of pulling exercise to failure. Yeah, absolutely. Again, pick the exercises you want, the movement patterns you want to do and do them. The order almost doesn't matter with the one caveat with larger muscle groups, particularly again, multiple leg activities. And that will induce a small amount of systemic fatigue. And so if you, I guess theoretically wanted to maximize your pushup number. And you did a whole bunch of say split squats. And you just did those and you, you know, did lunges for a mile or something like that. You might actually slightly compromise. You might not, but you might slightly compromise your ability to do as many pullups and a row or hold a bent over row or something like that. So if you really cared about that level, then you maybe want to do the wing. That's most important first in general. My recommendation though is to do the bigger muscle group first. How many sets and how often should one perform training for muskow endurance and when? Now the lovely part here is we've moved down the spectrum past hypertrophy. You don't need a lot of load here. In fact, the load only needs to be at or slightly above what you want to move. So if you want to get better at moving 50% of your one or max, you don't really need to train much more than 50 maybe 55 or 60% of your one or max. Because if you go higher than that, the repetition counts going to fall. And you're no longer going to be training muskow endurance. So you just need to stay right around that number that you want to work on. So again, if the target is doing more pullups and assuming that you have this strength to do it, you check that box. You simply need to practice the repetition range that you want to be in. That's all it takes. You can repeat that a number of times. But because remember, the volume is fairly low. The load is very, very low. You can actually repeat these quite frequently. So you won't get extremely sore from muskow endurance relative to traditional hypertrophy training because the load is very, very light. So you can do these more frequently if you would like more frequently such as you can do a three or four times a week easy. If you would like, you don't necessarily need to three days a week per muscle group is probably fine here. If you wanted to do more sets on a given day and do less days, that would be fine. So if you wanted to do two days a week and you say wanted to do let's say you could do 25 push ups and the goal is to get to 30 push ups as an example. You might say, OK, I'm going to do sets of 17 and I'm going to do three sets of that. I'm going to do that three days a week. That's going to build up quite a bit or you could say, look, I'm going to do a set basically to failure. I'm going to recover and do one or two sets at say 80% and I'll do that twice a week. That's going to push the pace pretty well. You're going to have a lot of gains from that. And again, this is not about hypertrophy. This is about muscular endurance. So I do want to emphasize and again, please correct me if I'm talking out of line here. Do want to emphasize that because we mentioned pull ups. If you can't get 25 pull ups, then and you're doing 10, you're training for hypertrophy. You're not training for muscular endurance per se. Remember, there's a big crossover here. So anytime we're talking past like 15 reps were technically in hypertrophy and muscular endurance. So here's a common mistake. I don't want to get bulky. So I'm going to go lighter and do more reps. And then people grow and then you landed still right in the middle of hypertrophy range. So like for people who are like, oh my gosh, like every time I lift weights, I blow up, I go lighter, I do more reps. And I, you're still writing the hypertrophy sound. They'd actually be much better off training very, very heavy in the one to three rep range. They'd get really strong and they wouldn't grow much exactly. So tell me if this is a reasonable protocol for what I'm going to call the typical person in my mind, the typical person, somebody who hopefully is doing resistance training, hitting that 10 sets per muscle group per week minimum to maintain or build strength and hypertrophy. But is also doing some long duration training that we'll talk about in a little bit, maybe throwing in high intensity workout here or there, some sprints, maybe some plymatrix, some skill based training and doing a bunch of different things to be what I would call all around fit. Yeah, they're not training for any specific event or trying to maximize any one of the nine adaptations to the exclusion of the others. That person decide, okay, after they do their longer run, they're going to do max time, a plank to max duration, they're going to do a wall sit to max duration and they do pushups to max duration. And then also do that same workout before they do their high intensity interval training, some other point during the week and then maybe even do it again on their so called rest day, just a real quick five minutes of sure and in doing so, build more capillaries into the relevant muscle groups and build their muscular endurance. Yep. Without eating into their overall recovery too much too much. Yeah. So again, the nice part about this is they don't hammer you too much. You're not going to get tremendously sore if you keep the load light. The only switch I would make there is I would probably do them after your interval, rather than before. So you can make sure you keep quality there. And you're not compromised by a local muscular endurance when you're actually trying to get a more systemic fatigue with something like a higher intensity interval training. So that would work fantastic. The only other variable we haven't hit on here is progression. And this is very simple. Try to add a rep or two per week. That's really all you have to go after. So if you're up to 22 this week, try to hit 23 next week. Well for wall sits in planks that would mean at time time. Yep. And if you run into a wall there. Just like the same concepts we talked about was strung the right person. Back it down to more like in the 80 or 85% range. And accumulate a lot more practice. That's going to help a lot with capitalization as well as acid buffering. So you're going to continue to give yourself signals for up regulation of the processes needed for that. And it's not always pushing you to the end failure. Just like we don't want to always go to failure with strength. We don't want to always go to failure with high intensity rules either. Same thing would be happening here. What about anaerobic capacity? How should people train for anaerobic capacity? What exactly are they training for meaning what is the structural or seller adaptation or adaptations that are occurring that allow for increases in anaerobic capacity. And why are increases in anaerobic capacity good for us. Even if we're a quote unquote endurance athlete or we are a recreational at exercise or who is not interested in building more muscle speed or things that I typically associate with anaerobic capacity. Yeah, so this is really, really fun. Remember anaerobic capacity is a total amount of work you can do for something like seconds to a few minutes. And this is extremely high levels of fatigue. The highest you're really going to see. And by fatigue here, I mean acid build up by products, not fatigue is in like mentally, I don't want to do this anymore. So if we just think about the energetics for a second. I'm going to do say let's take a really easy example of people have done that thing where you you'll go to the track and you sprint the straightaways and you walk the corners. Remember that sort of thing. Yeah, Tabata's 30 on 30 off things like this. Like this is what we're talking about in this kind of anaerobic capacity area. Now, here's what's going to happen is fat going to be your limiting. Now we already made that clear. Right. What about carbohydrates? Well, if it's a single bout or a two or three bouts, probably not. But if you're doing this for a long time, say you're going to go 30 on 30 off for 20 rounds. You may actually start reaching a point of running out of my muscle of like in any of those cases, though, you're going to be running into an acid problem. If you were to continue to do this multiple repetitions in addition to running low and muscle glycogen, you're also going to start running into oxygen transportation problems. Because you're building up a lot of byproducts, you got to continue. You will actually cruise into a aerobic glycolysis. This is exactly why the community that I have worked a lot with professional fighters. Very high level boxers, world champions, UFC fighters. It is a five minute round that you're going to do five times. This is for world championship fights. You get one minute break in between. So imagine going like 30 on 30 off for five minutes, getting a one minute break and doing that five times. Even though the individual ballots are 30 seconds long, the entire thing lasts so long. It is primarily a robot. You have to have both capacities. You've got to get really high anaerobic. You also have to have a lot of aerobic going on. You're going to start running into limitations because of heart rate, stroke volume, and then even potentially ventilation. The need for oxygen to be able to come in and clear the carbon dioxide totally out of the system becomes a problem because not only are you having so much build up for such a long time, you're also using multiple muscle groups. So now this is a very important distinction. Muscle endurance tends to be localized. Now this is not right. If you're doing these intervals, you're on an assault bike. You're sprinting up the hill. You're grappling with somebody. You have a lot of muscles being involved, which means all of that waste is being dumped into the central part. You have to clear and I'm by clear, I now mean not out of the muscle. I mean out of the body. So your ability to bring in and utilize oxygen is going to be a major limitation to your ability to handle this stuff. So what do you do? Well, specificity wins. Practice the exact thing you're talking about. So if you want to get better at sprinting this right away and walking the corners, do that. You can't always do it though. You're going to run into limitations. So this is when backing off to a lower intensity is going to give you a lot of benefits. We know very clearly if you want to improve cardiovascular fitness, high intensity, moderate intensity and low intensity are effective and you actually probably want to do a little bit of all of them. This is why none of our fighters, whatever just do high intensity training, there's going to be some moderate. We tend to call this like cardiac output training. You can think of this as like anywhere between zone two to zone four. If you like zones, I don't use them personally. So I'm just going to intentionally interrupt you because this issue of zones has come up a few times. I want to make sure everybody's on the same page. You also mentioned that you don't necessarily favor the zone, no mink, nature, but for those not familiar zone one, two, three, four, all the way up to five is a kind of back of the envelope type, verbiage for some people and is more precisely followed by for other people, meaning for me, zone one is simply walking, easy walking. And zone two would be for anybody, the pace or intensity of exercise that one could perform while still maintaining a conversation, but just barely, meaning if you were to push any harder, then it would be difficult to hold that conversation. So I'm going to do a little bit of the same thing, but I'm going to do a little bit of the same thing. So I'm going to give us a sense of the breathing patterns associated with each of the zones so that people could map to those when we discuss zone one through five. And as I say all this, I certainly tip my hat to all of those people out there who like to measure percent of maximum heart rate. And they like to use heart rate monitors, they're using any number of different devices. I sometimes use those devices, but in general, I tend not to and I use my breathing as a rough guide of which zone I'm in. So before we go back to specific protocols for anaerobic capacity, tell me how you think about zone one through five and how people might be able to assess whether or not they are in zone one, two, three or four or five. So zone five is that absolute top thing and we can flag ourselves there. I like to tell you flag one and two the distinction between three, four and five. I'm less concerned with either we will do some heart rate stuff, but not to identify what zone around the fact is the distinction between those zones is basically just made up right that not that it's fake, but there's no like rationale there. It's a little bit like perceived effort and weightlifting, you know, how are you at 100% output or 70% you know when you're at zero and you know when you're at 100 in that moment, but the difference between 60 and 70 is anybody's guess totally. So we use or the relevance right. So why is it matter from 60 or 70? Is there actually difference? There's not right. So it doesn't really matter in that regard. If you are very highly trained, particularly cyclist, things like that, then you can control a lot of circumstances. Those things start to make a lot more sense. But when you're in an open environment like the athletes ideal with. It's just not going to it's not going to matter that much. So the way that I approach this is and I will use this word intentionally stolen directly from Brian McKenzie and his company shift adapt. They use what's called a gear system and I absolutely love it. It's what we've been using for a long time. So with Brian with your permission, I'm going to take it right now. Thank you, Brian. He gave me the permission to thank Brian. Brian's a good friend of of ours. And I do think the breathing gear system is a terrific way to think about the zones and to get a good sense of what zone one happens to be. Yeah, great. So the first gear is your ability to simply breathe in and out through your nose at a set cadence. So basically, regardless of how hard you're working, can you restrict your breathing to like a two to three second inhale and then a two to three second exhale. And this is really clever actually because a lot of folks will jump immediately into an over breathing strategy. It's meant to be ventilating more than you need, which actually sends that RER up higher than it needs to be, which kicks you higher into carbohydrate utilization. If you're supposed to be in quote unquote zone one, you're trying to be efficient, not fast. So using more carbohydrates than you need is not beneficial here. You're walking for the day. You're out on a longer hike. You're enjoying the day. You shouldn't be trying to ramp up carbohydrate metabolism. It should be efficient. And so this would be getting into an argument with somebody while on a long walk. You feel exhausted afterwards over breathing. Yeah, totally right. So you should be able to breathe out at a specific cadence and generally people are doing that more frequently than night than they need. Right. Zone two, rather gear two is inhaling and exhaling at whatever rate you need to be, but still nasal homing. So it is a force. Right. Whatever you need to do, but your mouth is closing time. You shifted higher up. You're burning more and more carbohydrate as a fuel source. But you're still able to control that and restrict or nasal breathing. Now gear three and four, which is our final ones. There's no gear five gear three and four is like a subtle distinction. I actually don't even care about the difference. There I basically use gear one, two and then that's four. But you're basically talking about either a nose to mouth strategy. Or a straight up mouth. Right. So breathing in through the nose out through the mouth. If you can control that way, you know the opposite. Actually, right. Can you breathe in and out through your nose. But the classic one people do is into the nose out the mouth. Again, I really don't even care about this distinction. I basically jump from two to four. Brian may do it differently. I don't actually know. Four is just mouth mouth. Right. And this is the case in most sporting applications. You're going to be breathing because the nose is restricted. Right. There's only so much space. And as we talked about earlier, the consequences of not having enough oxygen in or CO2 exhalation. If you're restricting that, this is going to be problematic. So in your actual competition, please go to the mouth. If you need to, right. We practice a lot trying to stay nasal only for as long as possible. But that's going to happen when you're doing your high intensity intervals and you're really going as hard as you can, you're going to have to go to your mouth unless you're an absolute free. So you can say in your nose, but that's not going to happen. Right. Most people can't get past say 70 or 80% while breathing through your nose. I know some people can get higher. But that's the general distinction. So we pay much more attention to those particular gears. Then we do heart rate zones. And zone five would be just pure mouth breathing all out running for your life. The gear systems just one to four. There's no fifth gear. Got it. So the gear four would again be mouth mouth. Breathing as much in as you can breathing as much as you can out. Got it. And I appreciate your description of the gear system and how it roughly relates to the zones we've been talking about. Also, in reminded. If anyone wants to experience the relationship between breathing and the offloading of carbon dioxide and your ability to exert effort in anything, a game that a friend of mine sometimes likes to play when we walk or jog and talk is he'll say, let's just hold our breath now until we hit that piling or that lifeguard stand on the beach. And within seconds, you actually can start to panic. Also becomes very hard to coordinate your action after a little while. Again, be really careful with this. But it will teach you in a moment in a very real world way. How important it is to be able to offload carbon dioxide because you're probably not running out of oxygen at those lower intensities. No question. You're simply building up carbon dioxide and that gas brief flex is screaming to go off and you're actively suppressing it. Yeah. So the interesting test here is your CO2 tolerance on Ryan's website and go directly there. You can. There's a video to how to run this test. And then you can put in your numbers and it will tell you sort of exactly what to do as a result of it. But the CO2 tolerance test is a test of exactly what you just mentioned. So you should be fairly tolerant. In other words, non reactive. You can be responsive but non reactive to elevations in CO2. So you should see them and feel them, but you should be choosing how you respond rather than an reaction. There are interesting data looking at things like out of the blue panic attacks. You can actually notice those in blood. The arises in CO2 up to 45 minutes prior to the event happening. So there are signals happening in your body that you may be sensitive or not sensitive to the more in tune you can get with that. The better your life is going to be. And even if we're specifically just talking about exercise performance. So it's okay for CO2 to rise. It's going to rise. It's a byproduct of anaerobic anaerobic metabolism. It's a byproduct of carbohydrate and fat metabolism as we've established. It's going to get there. You're going to feel that. However, if you immediately go into a panic because of a small increase in CO2. This is a problem. So we're turning to anaerobic capacity this morning. We were training not together. I couldn't keep up with your workout. But I would but in the same general space. And I did my once a week maximum heart rate one minute sprint on the assault bike. Sometimes I'll do more minutes. Meaning I will do one minute then take some rest and do another minute after some rest. But I decided to do that one minute with you there so I could learn from you. And indeed. I have to assume that that was largely within the anaerobic capacity. Well. The first 30 seconds or so were manageable. We gave more and more painful. There was a quit signal going off in my head. You said there's real magic that occurs around second 40 and indeed somewhere around second 40 for whatever reason it seemed easier. But at the one minute mark, I was happy to stop because I was really at at least what fell to me 100% output. Yeah. Is that a good protocol for building up anaerobic capacity keeping in mind what you said before, which is that specificity or precision as you raised it is important. That is if I want to train anaerobic capacity for sprinting, I probably should have been sprinting cycling. I was I was only assault bike. And so on. How many of those one minute all out sprints or 30 seconds all out sprints on the on the bike could and should one perform per workout and per week. So marching through exercise choice. Yep. Let's do order volume frequency and progression. Yep. Choice of exercises. Train for what you want to improve. Is that right? Not necessarily. So in this particular case, if you have a specific goal, yes, of course, do it exercise choice a couple of things you want to look for. You want to pick something that you feel extremely confident in the movement with because you're going to forget your brain very quickly here because you're going to go into our pain cave. So if you're not comfortable running, don't go run here. You're never going to get to the spot we need to get to it. If you're not comfortable or if every time you you go on a row or your low back hurts the next day. Don't do it. If you're not comfortable using kettlebell swing is that you get the point don't do an exercise. You're not comfortable with you also secondarily want to be careful cautious of heavy eccentric loads. Because you're going to be doing a lot of repetitions at a high intensity. So this is where I love an assault bike. This is why a rower is great. Swimming is amazing. Running uphill, generally more favorable than running on normal ground, especially if you're not runner. Don't run downhill. That's a lot of eccentric load. I don't love things like box jumps here. Right. Because again, a lot of eccentric loading. If suppose you can jump up line of the box step down. But now you're again, you're too many things are going to your mind. I don't want to slip and fall and I want to smash my shin on the box. What happens if I'm too many variables pick something that is safer where you can really focus on your breathing and your posture and the performance. All right. So that's exercise choice. And then within that if there's some specific thing you want to get better at, go ahead do it. Okay. How many different movements, meaning should I do the assault bike and then some form of safe executable overhead pressing. It's a little harder to imagine an aerobic capacity for the upper body unless you have access to a skier or one of these. What are those things called the climber machines? Yeah, the Versa climber. The Versa climber. That's the one the Versa climber. You can tell how often I do that one. That's a great. So great piece of extra guys equipment. Yeah. So we're thinking how many how many exercises and in what order is it going to be two or three exercises. Since you're involving a lot of muscle groups. Yeah. That's a really distinction. Generally, these are going to be total body movements. So you can do something like a skier. If you want to really isolate your upper body. Great. Love that. You can do lower body isolation like cycling. Right. We have a lot involved. You can use weights here. You can do some barbell movements and stuff like that. They're just not my favorite choices for most people. Too many complexity things going on. So I generally am going to pick total body movements pushing a sled, dragging a sled, sprinting up hill, swamming, these things like that are going to be good. I'm seeing now why the assault bike is such a powerful tool because you're using your arms with some degree of resistance, but not a lot of eccentric load plus legs. Some resistance, not a lot of eccentric load. And yet one can go, quote, unquote, all out for 30 to 60 seconds. Yep. And the consequences of a technical breakdown are minimal. It's more like you're going to actually have a worse performance rather than an injury rate. So there's just a wonderful invention because of that where other things, the consequences like say if you're going to be doing a barbell or kettlebell activity, the consequences of making a technical mistake. You might actually get an acute injury right there. So they're just a little bit higher in the risk scale. How many sets or sometimes referred to as repeats. So how many 30 to 60 second all out sprints again doesn't have to be running sprinting but all out effort would be the better way to phrase it should I perform. Let's say per week and then decide whether or not we can divide those up across multiple workouts or whether or it's better to do them in the same workout. Yeah. If you're staying with the same exercise for all of your workouts, that's a little bit different answer than if you're modifying them. So say you're going to do this three times a week and you're going to do an air bike one day, you can do some hill sprints another day and you can do some swimming another day. For a sake of example, I'm going to say same movement because I think most people are going to be most comfortable with one or two types of movements. Yeah. Unless they are really coordinated or an excellent athlete. I think most people can probably find a hill that they could run up and an air dine or a salt bike, a rower, things that sort. Yep. You're going to have a pro and a con here. So the pro of doing less sets is you can actually train much closer to truly 100%. The downside is volumes low. Okay. So a major mistake people make here is they'll do something like I'll do 20 seconds on 10 seconds off and I'll do that for 40 rounds. You're not really actually going that hard in those 20 seconds. So a key. In fact, if you look at the literature and all the buzz and all the positive benefits of high intensity and your training, that assumes you are actually hitting very close to 100%. If you're sliding down into like again moderate training stuff, you start to actually be in a spot where you're not getting the total high end stuff, but you're not doing it long enough to get the low end stuff either. And so you end up in this like you burn some calories. You probably still enhanced my no condra about Genesis and a little bit of capitalization, but you didn't really justify only doing three rounds. That's where the problem comes in. So in terms of a couple of protocols, I'll give you a how many sets per week. It's really hard to give a number unlike the strength training stuff where it was easy to kind of land some stuff on. A typical thing you'll see is like a minimum of those tends to be something like four rounds per day, three times per week. That's a lot. So my once a week. All out effort of sprinting on the assault bike, the so called air dying bike for 60 seconds, one to three rounds of that might be doing something useful for me, but I should probably be doing that two or three times a week. If you're going to get to a max heart rate, I'd generally like to say give me a minimum of one day a week, two is better days per week, how many rounds, whatever it takes you to get to that maximum heart rate. Right. So in your case, you did one minute. Okay, good. If you're going to extend past a minute or two, one round might be not. So for example, if you want to just do something where I'm going to run a mile as fast as I can. That's all you need to do for the day. You don't need to do multiple. You can do mile repeats if you'd like, but that is really, really challenging. I know we've extended the time duration here, but I wanted to go there to show you the time domain matters. If you're doing something like a 20 second burst, you're going to need more rounds. If you're doing something longer, like multiple minutes, you don't need as many rounds to get there. So in addition, if you're really reaching past this 90 seconds, 90 seconds of hell window, it's just going to do a lot more damage to the system, not damage is in bad, but is in there's a lot to recover here. So we need more recovery time from that. A 20 second burst doesn't really challenge you. Challenges in that 20 seconds, but you'll be recovered and fine. A three minute thing is going to hurt and it's going to hurt for many, many, many minutes after that. And you're going to still see maybe some performance decrements the next day, depending on what your recovery stuff looks like. So a couple of things to play with would be something like this. If you want to try like a classic 30 seconds on 30 seconds off protocol, the literature will show like a minimum of four rounds of that probably three days a week. So 30 seconds all out 30 seconds rest is one round. Repeat that four times, at least once a week, at least two would be better. Great. Right. If you want to go something a lot longer than that, you might be able to get away with one. But generally two days a week of this is better. If you start actually pushing past like three to four days a week up to five or six, you may actually be causing some problems. There's just a little bit of excess fatigue that's going to happen there that you might be wants to away from. In fact, you can see a lot of endocrine logical problems and some other sleep issues and some other things kick in. And we'll talk about more of those things this later. But that's the number to get with. If you want to try something more like a 20 second burst, I actually would recommend giving yourself more rest. So you can actually do a higher rest than work ratio. Most people tend to think of this is doing like one to one 20 seconds on 20 seconds off or lower. I love doing like 20 seconds on 40 seconds off. The quality of that 20 seconds becomes extraordinarily high. And it's also possible to now get like six to eight rounds. So as I'm hearing this, I'm going to wager an offer to you. And if you say OK, then to those listening. Based on what you're telling me about the relationship between intensity and quality and the need for sufficient duration of this anaerobic work. How is five to six minutes per week of all out work? That's pretty good. So what that means for me is I would do three all out one minute sprints on one workout separated by a minute or two. Maybe more. And I would do that two or three times per week, just trying to hit that five or six minute per week threshold. Yeah, I actually think one of the Marty Gabala is the scientist, Canadian guy, amazing work, who's done a lot of the research on high intensity animal stuff. And I think the number he actually threw out there is some of his original research was comparing six total minutes of work to upwards of like 180 minutes of work throughout the entire week. And then one of the classic studies was looking at VO to max improvements. And he saw equal if not greater improvements of VO to max with that. So I think actually the name of his book might be like six minute workout or something. And so you'd like to mail that directly on the head. Purely by luck, but actually by also maybe wrong number, so we should probably fact check that. Yeah, well, and also by inference from what you were saying, you know, if you're going to do this 20 seconds on 40 seconds off and you're doing more rounds or one minute all out. So the way I'm going to think about this, if it's okay with you is for five to six minutes a week, I am sprinting for my life. Correct. But I'm sprinting for my life with good form in whatever movement I happen to be doing. And I can do all of that in one workout, but I'm separating out about of 20 seconds all the way up to one minute. Yep. By the necessary rest in order to recover my breathing, get back to pure nasal breathing, maybe zone one zone totally totally. And then hit it again. If you're going to do the one minute thing like you do, I actually generally encourage one to three minutes of rest before you do the next round and probably up to four to six rounds. That would be your six minute number there. Now the caveat there is we don't worry about heart rate recovery. We worry about exactly what you mentioned, which is nasal only recovery. Once you can get back to that, give yourself another 30 seconds or so. And then you're ready to go for round two. This is where it gets fun because I can imagine challenging myself to get on the assault bike for one minute of kind of warm up, very low intensity each morning and then sprint for a minute and then head off into my daily routine. No. Okay. That if you're going to do that, though, you need to give me three minutes of nasal only breathing before you go back to work. We need to down. And there are people in my life that would love for me to engage in more nasal breathing because it will have me speaking less. So no problem chances are I'm going to use the two or three workouts per week of one minute all out. Maybe I'll try the shorter protocol. Can I give you one fun protocol to try here? Please. So if you have a you can use this on any equipment. But I learned this from another mutual friend Kenny can. This is a great little it's a little test, a little a little game. You can play with yourself and the only way to play this game is you're going to lose, which is really, really lovely. So you can do this at any door rate. You can do this for any duration of time, but two minutes is a good number. Okay. So you have to do this in someone where you can know distance. So this could be running, cycling, the air bike is what I use. The first two minutes, you're going to cover as much distance as you can possibly cover in two minutes. And you're going to note that. So let's say you covered 400 meters. Okay, great. You're going to rest for two minutes. Amazing. That next round, you're now going to go for distance. So you're going to cover the exact same amount of distance you covered in round one, which in this example was 400 meters. And it doesn't matter how long it takes you. It may take you two minutes and five seconds, two minutes and 10 seconds because you're a little bit fatigued from round one round three. You're going to now come back and do that exact same time domain that you did in round two. So if it took you two minutes and five seconds and round two. Now round three is going to last two minutes and five seconds. And you want to see if you can cover a greater distance. 405 meters, 410 meters. Then you did in round one. And the beauty of this little protocol, six minutes total of work, right. But if you slack in one of the rounds, you just make the next round harder. Is there any rest between rounds? Yeah, two minutes. Always two minutes rest. You don't have to, but this would be my recommendation. Kenny came up with this. I don't know if he came up with it. He taught me. We both know Kenny and he's an incredibly nice and incredibly skilled trainer. I'm going to call it the sugar cane. Yeah, it's so great because it sounds really painful. And if you go out too hard in round one, you're in such big trouble round two. But if you go to easy in round one, you're going to get absolutely obliterated in round three. So it's like a wonderful thing. And you can pick that number as a standardization and then just try to improve that a little bit for a week. So progression is the last part of this whole thing that we haven't got to yet before move on. And the way you want to progress all of these things is you can time stamp again how much work you can do. And then just try to do a slightly higher amount of work, five percent or so every week. Or you can add around, which is a really nice way. So in the research studies that have been done, they're going to do things like week one, you'll do three rounds. We two, you'll do four rounds, three, you'll go five rounds, you'll like add around and tell you get up to say six or seven or eight rounds at the end of the protocol. So that's a really nice way to go about it. Or you can cap the rounds and just try to get more work done in that same amount of time. Meaning go more intensely. Correct. Get, you know, get further distance in your 30 seconds or your 45 seconds or whatever. I want to encourage people to go as low as 20 seconds. That's going to allow you to go very, very, very fast. That's going to actually challenge that phosphocreatine piece a little bit. I want to encourage people to also go as high as 90 seconds. So the honest way the way that I will do it, not that it's about me, but just as an example of something you could do. I do something in the 15 to 22nd burst range. And I will generally hedge towards a two to one rest to work ratio. So I'm probably going to rest 40 to 60 seconds. That's sure to, that's to make sure that 20 second burst is extremely high quality. Cool. I'm also going to do something in the 30 to 50 second range. Okay, I might go one to one work rest ratio. The quality of those 30 seconds is going to come down, but the acid buffering is going to be extraordinarily challenged. I also will do that with a triple or quadruple rest range. So again, 30 seconds on, maybe two minutes off. Now, I won't be able to be, I won't be working on my ability to handle the waste product build up there, but I'll be working on my ability to produce more force over that time, which is another skill set. And then all the way up to say what you do a minute, 70 seconds, and you can go one to one there or up to three to one. You're going to be working on a little bit of his different thing, but that's exactly how we hit both sides of this equation working on dealing with waste as well as actually working on bringing in nutrients and getting that system a little bit more. So you could set that up across your week and just it could be something like day one is that 22nd burst window day two is that maybe 60 second window and then day three is maybe one all out effort. And we're done there. Let's talk about the specific protocols and adaptations related to maximum aerobic output or maximum aerobic capacity is that sometimes called sure. Now we're moving past like that couple of minute range into like the you know five to 15 minute range, but at a maximum intensity. So what's the highs you can go from there? We're not talking about our last category of long duration here. Well, the beautiful part is we've already explained a lot of it because it's very similar to what we just talked about with anaerobic capacity. It is primarily going to be a problem of dealing with waste products, especially at the end. It's not enough total distance to be running out of muscle like a gym though it may start to creep down a little bit. That's not going to be an issue, but certainly more oxygen transportation is going to be an issue. So we're just hedging a little bit more towards that side of the equation towards the end of that workout. No doubt about it clearing out waste products is going to be a huge issue, but really oxygen demand delivery starting to take more of a prominent role because we have had more time to clear waste and if we're not good at that, we're going to be failing earlier than we need. So the training for that needs to be a little bit at that exact same so a classic thing here is a one mile test, right? This is going to last for most people somewhere between five and 10 minutes. You're sort of right in this window. If you just want to practice that once a week, we're done here, right? Exercise choice. Same thing we talked about, right? Pick an exercise you're comfortable with that you can actually do and you could progressively increase in terms of the intensity. You're not going to be going to have to stop and change your exercise. You're not going to move around. It's like a circuit isn't great here because you got to put one implement down pick up another one. You want to be doing something where there is literally not a second of off switch. So similar exercise choice principles we just covered. If you go and become a real savage and you want to do repeats here, you can endurance folks will do that a lot. One mile repeats 800 minute your repeats things like that or I'm not sure if the swimming distance equivalents would be but swimmers would do this constantly. But you don't need to this is really hard. It's pretty hard in the system. It's very good for you. One to twice a week of hitting this. I think you'll be in a really really good spot frequency. We sort of discovered we covered exercise choice volume. We just sort of nailed an intensity is basically running you up to the top there. Now because you can only do that so often you want to add in another 40 or so percent of your time being lower intensity support work for that. So this is something probably less than 85% of your heart rate but higher than quote unquote zone two you got to be working here. This is not I could have a conversation pace. This is higher than that. It's in between conversation pace and the pace I need to be at to run my fastest mile I've ever done. That's that middle ground and you need to train that so that you can continue to work on capitalization oxygen transportation. But you're not burning down the house getting all the up to 100 100 plus percent of your VOT max. Could I use a crude version of this where I say okay I'm going to exercise for 10 minutes. I'm going to go as fast as I safely can. And every week I'm going to measure how far I travel. Yep. He's not 10 minutes. Love it. Probably not on the same day that I'm doing the anaerobic capacity work probably not. If you're probably okay to do after a strength training or hypertrophy workout as long as I didn't train legs. You could. It's probably going to compromise recovery is the way so I would if you're going to do a session like this I would probably do it on its own day. Unless you wanted to do something like speed or power. Then you could roll right into this and have no problem. Maybe a strength day hypertrophy day. I'm not sure you would do there because again especially if you didn't sort of lower body exercise you're going to be compromised here. But remember these tend to be full body movements. So even if you did arms that day your arms are going to be compromising and you don't want to fail this because of local muscular failure. Alright so now I've got my work cut out for me. I'm going to be doing five to six minutes per week of all out work divided into 60 20 to 60 second. Bouts with sufficient rest and I'm going to give myself 10 minutes a week of in my case he'll probably be running as fast as I can because I do enjoy running and I can do it safely. Maybe uphill and see how far I go. Yep. If you want to combine the two. So if you're just saying hey I'm bought in Andy like I want to do both of these things they are similar but they have independent benefits. I'm convinced how would I build these into the same week. Maybe do one of each that still gets you at quote unquote two days per week where you're going to hit a maximum heart rate. So you're going to have to check that box up so one day can be a shorter length interval repeat one and the other one can simply be a five to 15 minute maximum work and you're done. Long duration endurance exercise the stereotypical endurance exercise. Sure. How far how long how fast or how slow should rather should I go and here I'm going to venture that exercise choice is one that we could click off even at this point in the discussion because obviously it's got to be something that I can do for a long while without getting injured. Overuse injuries. There's a little bit of novelty we can actually throw in here so. One of the things I love to do for long duration endurance for people don't love running cycling or swimming is you can do a really cool workout any number of things where you can put a little circuit together as long as there's not a lot of downtime between one circuit to the next time you can actually do is something as simple as like maybe you're going to do farmers carries. And you'll do that for say three minutes and you'll set those down you'll go straight into a plank for a minute you pick that up and you go straight into maybe body weight squats for two minutes and you go straight into another exercise and you so you can sort of rotate things around maybe you can do even some like shadow boxing stuff or some jump rope. You can do different gymnastics movements and body weight movements and you can run that thing through and you can basically get the exact same thing accomplished and not feel like you're doing oh my gosh this mind numbing type of training if it feels like that to you another way can do that to actually even simplify it even more. We've done this at Kenny canes gym plenty of times where you just maybe even pick three machines so you're going to go I'm going to go 10 minutes on the roer and I'm going to go 10 minutes on the treadmill and I'm going to go 10 minutes on the bike. You can actually knock a 30 minute quote unquote steady state session out and not feel those problems if those things happen so you can actually have a lot of fun there we will do a lot of times with our fighters will do things like put a very low load I'm talking sub 50% of your max on a barbell and you're going to squat and you're going to do you know maybe a minute you're going to put that down and then you're going to go over and do 50% of a bench press you put that down you're going to go over and do. 50% of a of a crab block and then you're going to go over and do another one and you can actually run through this entire thing you don't hit that many reps in any individual movement the load is very very light and you can keep heart rate bezgith steady state and do 15 or 20 or 30 different exercises and it's actually fairly fun and engaging to do and it's a little bit more specific than trying to get a 275 pound NFL player to run for 30 minutes which is not going to be good. I'm just chuckling because I love to run outdoors and I've enjoyed runs on all my travels and I find it to be a great way to see different places and I like moving through space but there are weather conditions and times when that's not an option so what you described as a terrific alternative I have to assume that the specific adaptation that's occurring here is related to the fat burning system and again that doesn't necessarily mean fat loss. Overall but fat burning system and yet I do have a question which is can you build enhanced micro capillary systems into the muscles by doing this long duration cardio yeah absolutely can in fact depending on which paper you like more than the other papers you may even find evidence that this is a superior method than anything else steady state endurance is very important. I used to not like it as much there's just so much evidence now that suggests it's probably a really good thing for basically everybody maybe for some individuals it's not in all year of their training but if if you're not a high level athlete or have a very specific goal that's right in front of you it's probably best to do at least 20 minutes as a minimum maybe 30 minutes of some steady state exercise once a week for basically any training goal outside of again. A couple of really specific scenarios that are happening the other thing that kind of kicks in here that we haven't really talked about is now we're actually reaching a position where fatigue of the intercostals starts to play so diaphragmic fatigue starts to run in occasion so we forget generally breathing is a contraction to open up the lungs to change pressure so the air will flow in and then the exhalation is passive right it's just a muscles been stretched to go back to this right. So you're really going to get a lot of pressure when you get to a maximum heart rate inhalation and exhalation become active so you're squeezing as hard as you can to open up in your squeeze and to contract the blow air out. You're going to get fatigued that system right over time you have contracted contracted open up if that system starts to get fatigued you start running into failure here so you need to practice that and this is when all kinds of things like breathing drills to just simply training in this fashion there's all kinds of exercise devices for your lungs and when we say that that's what we're really talking about. The musculature around the lungs needs to not fatigue so that's the only other little component I wanted to throw in here if we're not talking about acid buffering which in this particular case is not a problem anymore. The time domain is long and slow earth so we have plenty of time to use fat as a fuel we also have plenty of time to use anaerobic anaerobic like causes and clear out waste products so we don't really see pH being a problem with this type of exercise. You may start running low on liver glycogen if you're going a very long time musculicogen may start getting low but not really these for huge issues you're going to run into maybe a little bit of stroke volume issue but and intense is not high enough to become a problem you're more likely to break down posturally or breathing mechanics than really anything else unless again that duration really gets generally past two hours for most people so those are the things are going to limit us so how do we improve it what do we train we went through the exercise. You also need to make sure you're training your intercostals we need to be training our diaphragm in some fashion again it can be the exercise itself can be your normal training. The thing you need to be careful of here and this is actually true for all the things we just talked about when we think about fatigue and we think about failure and endurance we really need to pay attention to technical breakdown. That is always the marker we look for so when we go through our stuff with our athletes and they quote unquote fail they finish that's generally because we saw a massive technical breakdown you're done like you're over there not always the case during all your round of training but this is something to really pay attention to so if you're on that bike in your 42nd sin and all of a sudden posture starts to crunching over I may stop the test I may stop the training it's like no well we decided failure was is when you lost your technique. To some sufficient level so you want to pay attention to that too because that's going to determine your ability to perform well as well as maintain efficiency which is a really big problem here. Tell me if the protocol I'm about to describe would be a reason for people to incorporate 60 to 120 minutes of long duration work per week. So one way to accomplish that that I often use is to head out for a weight vested hike it's not a heavy weight vest maybe I think it's eight or 10 pounds one of these thinner ones and if people don't have access to that you can bring a backpack with some items in it I mean it can be a simple as that. It's an external load it can just be your body. Okay great and and do some hiking at a fast enough clip that breathing harder than I would be if I just kind of shuffled along yeah I might stop here there during some water no big deal. But I can carry on a conversation if I need to so it's a zone to ish but probably pushing a little bit harder than that for that duration yeah not a lot of deep soreness occurring after this maybe a little bit of achiness and some stabilization muscles that were used that may not be a good thing. So I'm not going to use that may not be used too much especially if I've been sitting a lot during the week kind of reminds me of how much I've been sitting. But doing that all in one long afternoon typically on a weekend or doing two shorter sessions throughout the week may 45 minutes and 45 minutes and then working up the progression to longer longer duration seems like that would be something that most people should be able to do. Yep and that it would weave in well with any resistance training or the anaerobic and aerobic output capacity work that we talked about just a moment ago. Great that's a fine version to do it if you want to go shorter and bring up the intensity a little bit so you want to keep it more to the 30 to 60 minute range and go you know closer into the I can't have a conversation right now but again I'm not at a blistering heart rate. And then you could probably get that same thing done in a smaller time window if that was a consideration so if you wanted to blend all three of these together you have a lot of wiggle room right so you could do something like order. If we're talking about this type of training you could do this first and then finish with either one of the higher intensity stuff we talked about so it could be roped into the same thing it could be its own independent day could be your sort of active recovery day tends to be fairly restorative as you. alluded to a little bit there so it's not that big of deal to do this on your quote unquote off day if you're those if you're that type of person who like even on your off that you have to do something physical this is fine right. If you wanted to do it on a lifting day. Especially if it's a power strength day it's probably fine if you wanted to do it before the workout or after it either way you're probably okay probably best to do after. If the primary goal is one of the strength training adaptations if it's not if this is a primary goal do it first amazing if you wanted to do it in the combination. With the other interval stuff you could do it fine there you could do it before or you could do it afterwards I actually have no problem doing an afterwards because that in effect. Especially if you say nasal only during this training will help the down regulation go and so you could finish that fairly well down regulator actually so it's kind of like a nice way to get thoroughly warmed up. Go really really hard and then give it a nice 20 to 30 minute slow back down and by the time you finish maybe even on a three minute walk. Nice slow nasal breathing for second inhale for second and maybe five see play with the numbers a little bit then maybe you don't even need to do the down regulation breathing after we're just being a good spot. Well you wouldn't want to do this before do your intervals finish your intervals throw up lay on the ground sweat all over the gym floor get up and go back to work that's probably on our best strategy. So I think people are hearing this all they may be thinking wow this is a lot of work to do but I've been keeping track of the math here some share some of the other hours well and we're really talking about 10 minutes of the of running or sprinting on the bike or row or once a week we're talking about six minutes or so of the much higher intensity but short bouts divided into rounds of 20 to 20 seconds to a minute with with rest in between and then some longer duration work out of 30 minutes minimum. But maybe as much as an hour even two hours which in total doesn't really equate to that much time especially if one can access these things right out their front door or at home and as we pointed out you don't need any specialized equipment to do that. Oh and I forgot the muscular endurance I wasn't trying to cheat there some muscular endurance thrown in as well so that brings me to a question which is if I'm doing my training. For muscular endurance each week for anaerobic capacity and for maximum aerobic output and long duration and given that all of that can take roughly two hours for the typical person total for the entire week which I would argue is going to give you back so much life literally in terms of longevity or literally going to earn back years of your life productivity. Offsetting all sorts of metabolic issues and enhancing your sleep and improving mood and there's so much data so much data pointing to all those positive benefits if I do all of these things and I'm fairly consistent about them am I going to be metabolically flexible am I going to have a well developed fat burning carbohydrate burning system and will I be essentially fit I mean this is not leaving aside issues of strength and hypertrophy which were covered in the previous episode will I be fit I mean to my mind the ability to you know sprint very fast if one needs to the ability to go longer duration if one needs to and the ability to do something in between as well as you know hold a box overhead if necessary I'm well installing a shelf or something like that these are the realities of life. And to me represent real functional world fitness if that's the case is there anything that we would want to add to this program or would you consider that a fairly comprehensive and complete endurance training system if we remember the target which is I want to have energy. I want to look a certain way and you want to be able to do that for the duration of your life for a very long life. This style of training where you incorporate all of those areas of endurance gives you all of the necessary adaptations one would need to execute all of those things remember fat loss or weight management is not best done with any individual style of protocol. So if you do a little bit of all three of these you've checked that fat loss box you don't need to go out and do anything separate for it you've done all the things then to cover aesthetics from that side of the equation right you've done the things to both enhance my no country to enhance blood flow increase oxygenation and manage fatigue and waste development. Boom energies there fatigue is there i'm not going to get tired or have to quit or stop or sit down doing any of these activities I want at the same time if you look at the literature on mortality one of these strongest predictors of how long you're going to live is your VO to max. So we've set up a scenario in which you're going to hit all three of those primary goals by doing a combination of this training you're not going to miss any plausible adaptation from endurance training and you should be set for regardless of your goal. Incredible and as I understand totally compatible with strength and hypertrophy training provided that your goal is to also be strong and also selectively hypertrophy or generally hypertrophy your muscles or maintain your muscles. For many people that are listening to this i'm guessing that they have an interest in building more endurance but not just the ability to go further but the ability to go a given distance at a higher speed and to do it with better form and to breathe better and to feel better before during and after. For those folks maybe you could spell out a program that combines these different elements of endurance and does so in a way that informs how for instance the higher intensity short duration sprints would be expected to improve their longer duration work and how perhaps their longer duration work can progress if they are careful to include some planks and some wall sets and things of that sort. I asked this question specifically because I have to believe that while they're probably are some folks out there they're looking to maximize their plank from week to week to week. Typically it seems that people fall into these categories of either wanting to get stronger and get bigger muscles to varying degrees or to get better at endurance or to get better at everything overall right now i'd really like to just focus on what you think is a nice contour of a program for the person that wants to get better at endurance but you can't do that. So I don't want to add endurance but do it with more speed more stability and just feel like a strong endurance runner cyclist swimmer or whatever happened to be their endurance event. Okay great so let's just give an example maybe you want to run your first half marathon something like that maybe done a couple times before but you just want to get better at that time. I would probably put somewhere in the neighborhood of 60 to 70% of your you know mileage in the moderate intensity zone. Okay so you need to accumulate mileage and you need to be able to handle what we call the tissue tolerance so in this case your feet need to be able to handle 13 miles of pounding. It doesn't matter how much high heart rate training you do or your fat deliverability none of that matters if your feet are blown up by mile eight. So in addition we talked about how even training in that 70 to 85% heart rate zone is quite effective at oxygen delivery fat utilization capitalization etc so you're going to get a lot of direct endurance benefits from that work you're also going to be working on what's honestly going to be one of your limiting factors which is that tissue tolerance and that pounding okay. In addition you need to be efficient with your technique and you need a lot of repetitions for motor skill development. So you want to spend most of your time there it's easy to recover from it's not extremely demanding and challenging awesome that leaves you in another 30 or 40% of training I would spend 10% of that in that like 20 second burst area you're going to drive up fatigue extremely high and you're going to really maximize your ability to recover from waste production. Alright great I would spend the remaining amount of time either on a little bit of actually maximum speed stuff that could actually be in the 22nd burst if you're really trying to go as fast as you can at the beginning of that exercise. And then the rest of it I would spend in that other zone which is more of like the five to 15 minutes but you're probably going to want to repeat those and this is when things like 800 meter run rest for double the time and then repeat that two or three times. You actually need that in this scenario because you're going to need to be able to be running for two most people are going to have to maybe around two hours or so something like that and so you want a little bit of what we call repeated endurance right so be able to handle that higher heart rate. Come back down do it again at the same time that's actually how you bump your mileage up. So instead of having this do more of these long duration distance runs you can still get maybe five or six miles done today if you're going to do a one mile repeat or whatever number you're looking at so for a lot of people that's kind of how I would structure it. That's honestly is very similar to what we laid out in the previous conversation which is getting this idea that more than 50% should be basically practice a little bit of work at the very top end of the spectrum but not too much. And then a little bit of work at the other end and you should be in a good spot a major mistake one would make here is only doing the long duration steady state stuff and just sort of saying I'm going to run a five mile this week and then do six miles next week and seven a set. That might work for you is I think we have enough evidence at this point both in the scientific realm as well as most of the coaches I think in this space would agree with me is that's a sub optimal strategy. So it could work but we can do better in terms of the structure of a program like this I realize that those structures very tremendously different coaches and different books and different programs are going to say oh you should run money through Friday with weekends off or every other day but in terms of this 70% 30% divide where 70% is going toward the specific event you're doing the kind of work that you're going to do during the specific event that you're most interested in cultivating or improving and the remaining. 30% coming from other sorts of supporting work how should one thing about distributing that other 30% should it be all geared towards maximizing recovery for the 70% or in other words could I do all that 30% work on one day I probably was split into two days that's the reality of it is so if you're thinking man coach wants me to train six days a week my schedule is tight I can pull off four. I can pull off four to five okay great what I might say is two of those days are just your your tempo right this is what like a runner would call it's like tempo training kind of in that space. Remind us with tempo training is just like 60 to 80% effort range where you're like running at probably the same stride length and rate that you're going to run your race at maybe a little bit lower but something similar you're practicing skill you're a crewing mileage and you're getting a little you're getting work and for sure work but it's not going to be a good thing. Sure work but it's not absolutely the fastest you can sprint it's also not conversation so this would be the what before we refer to as the 10 minutes of fast running or 10 minutes of fast rolling this is lower intensity than that got it this is. This is work accumulation got it this is practice stuff then one of the days a week I would probably enter in that 22nd 30 second burst for a little bit of speed there and then one of the other days is when I was. The other days is when I would do that true high intensity as hard as I can for hitting a VO 2 max something like that so that's probably how I'd break it if I had like four days a week if you had five you can maybe add in another day where you do more of that volume accumulation practice work but that's that's a pretty good split. This is the point in the episode where I say thank you ever so much you provided an enormous amount of incredibly interesting clear information that's also actionable I do feel as if I far better understand endurance in its many forms and even the seller underpinnings of that and even sub seller underpinnings of what endurance adaptations are and how to foster those through specific protocols things that not only I can do tomorrow but that I will do to. Tomorrow and where I hit my pain points I'll understand what's happening and the adaptation that I'm triggering when my legs are burning or I'm sucking for air through my mouth or I can calmly move along just through nasal breathing I will now know what's happening in my body and the specific adaptations that I'm triggering I think you also highlight something that is vitally important and I've never heard it phrased as clearly as you did today which is that it really doesn't matter how one seeks out to achieve fat loss provided certain criteria are met. Even while certain forms of exercise tap into fat stores more than others and you beautifully illustrated the relationship between energy utilization and breathing and the fact that we literally exhale fat to some extent. Of course. So once again thank you thank you and thank you I know I'm not alone in recognizing this information as incredibly interesting and actionable and indeed I do plan to put it into action as I hope many of our listeners will as well. Yet again the pleasure is actually a whole mind and I actually really appreciate the fact that you let me go so far into metabolism my PhD is in human bioenergetics so anytime I can go many hours into metabolism I get very excited. I don't typically get that leash in this format so I appreciate that I know you understand your audience will love that hopefully. Oh they'll they'll love it and I think that they'll especially love it because they understand that if one can wrap their head around even just a small fraction of the mechanisms that underlie given protocol it gives both tremendous depth and meaning to that protocol and makes it so much more flexible for people that can really think about what's happening as they're engaged in the process. So we're just going to be able to do something that's happening as they're engaging in a given protocol and know exactly what they can expect in terms of results. Great we've been on a bit of a journey here we've covered a lot of ground with speed development and strength and hypertrophy and now we walk through probably several hours here of endurance what I would love to do next is to just give you a more straightforward not as much background not as much metabolism none of the mechanisms right into protocols for someone who's not going to do that. I want to do that across my lifespan. How would I build all these things into a protocol that actually covers maybe the entire year and how would I would be able to repeat that year after year so I almost have this evergreen sustainable year long periodization structure that covers all the nodes I need to if I want everything we've talked about in these nine adaptations in this short short schedule. So I would love to do that in our next conversation. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zero cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple and on both Spotify and Apple you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for us or comments or suggestions or anything you want to do is just go to the bottom of the screen and you can see the link in the description. Please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple and on both Spotify and Apple you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for us or comments or suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover or guess you'd like me to include on the Hubertman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube we do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and during today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast. I'd also like to inform you about the Hubertman Lab podcast free newsletter. It's called the neural network newsletter and each month the neural network newsletter is sent out and it contains summaries of podcast episodes specific protocols discussed on the Hubertman Lab podcast all and fairly concise format and all completely zero cost you can sign up for the neural network newsletter by going to Hubertman Lab.com go to the menu and click on newsletter you provide us your email we do not share with anybody and as I mentioned before it's completely zero cost by going to Hubertman Lab.com you can also go into the menu tab and go to newsletter and see some example newsletters from months past. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion about fitness exercise and performance with Dr. Andy Galpin and as always thank you for your interest in science.